the first day, the first novell
wherein is contained, how hard a thing it is, to distinguish
goodnesse from hypocrisie; and how (under the shadow of holinesse)
the wickednesse of one man, may deceive many
messire chappelet du prat, by making a false confession, beguyledan holy religious man, and after dyed. and having (during his lifetime) bene a very bad man, at his death, was reputed for a saint,and called s. chappelet.
it is a matter most convenient (deare ladies) that a man ought tobegin whatsoever he doth, in the great and glorious name of him, whowas the creator of all things. wherefore, seeing that i am the manappointed, to begin this your invention of discoursing novelties: iintend to begin also with one of his wonderfull workes. to the end,that this being heard, our hope may remaine on him, as the thing onelypermanent, and his name for ever to be praised by us. now, as there isnothing more certaine, but that even as temporall things are mortalland transitory, so are they both in and out of themselves, full ofsorrow, paine, and anguish, and subjected to infinite dangers: so inthe same manner, we live mingled among them, seeming as part ofthem, and cannot (without some error) continue or defend our selves,if god by his especiall grace and favour, give us not strength andgood understanding. which power we may not beleeve, that either itdescendeth to us, or liveth in us, by any merites of our owne; butof his onely most gracious benignity. mooved neverthelesse andentreated by the intercessions of them, who were (as we are)mortals; and having diligently observed his commandements, are nowwith him in eternall blessednes. to whom (as to advocates andprocurators, informed by the experience of our frailty) wee are not topresent our prayers in the presence of so great a judge; but onelyto himselfe, for the obtaining of all such things as his wisedomeknoweth to be most expedient for us. and well may we credit, thathis goodnesse is more fully enclined towards us, in his continuallbounty and liberality; then the subtilty of mortall eye, can reachinto the secret of so divine a thought: and sometimes therefore we maybe beguiled in opinion, by electing such and such as our intercessorsbefore his high majesty, who perhaps are farre off from him, or driveninto perpetuall exile, as unworthy to appeare in so glorious apresence. for he, from whom nothing can be hidden, more regardeththe sincerity of him that prayeth, then ignorant devotion, committedto the trust of a heedlesse intercessor; and such prayers have alwaiesgracious acceptation in his sight. as manifestly will appeare, bythe novell which i intend to relate; manifestly (i say) not as inthe judgement of god, but according to the apprehension of men.
there was one named, musciatto francesi, who from beeing a most richand great merchant in france, was become a knight, and preparing togoe into tuscany, with mounsieur charles without land, brother tothe king of france (who was desired and incited to come thither bypope boniface) found his affaires greatly intricated heere and there(as oftentimes the matters of merchants fall out to bee) and that veryhardly hee should sodainly unintangle them, without referring thecharge of them to divers persons. and for all he tooke indifferentgood order, onely he remained doubtfull, whom he might sufficientlyleave, to recover his debts among many burgundians. and the rather washis care the more heerein, because he knew the burgundians to bepeople of badde nature, rioters, brablers, full of calumny, andwithout any faithfulnesse: so that he could not bethinke himselfe ofany man (how wicked soever he was) in whom he might repose trust tomeete with their lewdnesse. having a long while examined histhoughts upon this point, at last hee remembred one master chappeletdu prat, who ofttimes had resorted to his house in paris. andbecause he was a man of little stature, yet handsome enough, thefrench not knowing what this word chappelet might meane, esteeminghe should be called rather (in their tongue) chappell; imagined,that in regard of his small stature, they termed him chappelet, andnot chappell, and so by the name of chappelet he was every whereknown, and by few or none acknowledged for chappell.
this master chappelet, was of so good and commendable life; that,being a notarie, he held it in high disdaine, that any of hiscontractes (although he made but few) should be found withoutfalshoode. and looke how many soever hee dealt withall, he would beurged and required thereto, offering them his paines and travailefor nothing, but to bee requited otherwise then by money; whichprooved to bee his much larger recompencing, and returned to him thefarre greater benefit. hee tooke the onely pleasure of the world, tobeare false witnesse, if hee were thereto entreated, and(oftentimes) when hee was not requested at all. likewise because inthose times, great trust and beleefe was given to an oath, he makingno care or conscience to be perjured: greatly advantaged himselfe bylaw suites, in regard that many matters relyed upon his oath, anddelivering the truth according to his knowledge.
he delighted (beyond measure) and addicted his best studies, tocause enmities and scandals betweene kindred and friends, or any otherpersons, agreeing well together; and the more mischiefe he couldprocure in this kind, so much the more pleasure and delight tooke hetherein. if he were called to kill any one, or to do any othervillanous deede, he never would make deniall, but go to it verywillingly; and divers times it was well knowen, that many were cruellybeaten, ye slaine by his hands. hee was a most horrible blasphemerof god and his saints, upon the very least occasion, as being moreaddicted to choller, then any other man could be. never would hefrequent the church, but basely contemned it, with the sacramentsand religious rites therein administred, accounting them for vileand unprofitable things: but very voluntarily would visit tavernes,and other places of dishonest accesse, which were continually pleasingunto him, to satisfie his lust and inordinate lubricitie. hee wouldsteale both in publike and private, even with such a conscience, as ifit were given to him by nature so to do. he was a great glutton anda drunkarde, even he was not able to take any more: being also acontinuall gamester, and carrier of false dice, to cheate with themthe very best friends he had.
but why do i waste time in such extent of words? when it may sufficeto say, that never was there a worse man borne; whose wickednessewas for long time supported, by the favour, power, and authoritie ofmonsieur musciatto, for whose sake many wrongs and injuries werepatiently endured, as well by private persons (whom hee would abusenotoriously) as others of the court, betweene whom he made nodifference at all in his vile dealing. this master chappelet, beingthus remembred by musciatto (who very well knew his life andbehaviour) he perfectly perswaded himselfe, that this was a man apt inall respects, to meete with the treachery of the burgundians:whereupon, having sent for him, thus he beganne.
chappelet, thou knowest how i am wholly to retreate my selfe fromhence, and having some affaires among the burgundians, men full ofwickednesse and deceite; i can bethinke my selfe of no meeter a manthen chappelet, to recover such debts as are due to mee among them.and because it falleth out so well, that thou art not now hinderedby any other businesse; if thou wilt undergoe this office for me, iwill procure thee favourable letters from the court, and give thee areasonable portion in all thou recoverest. master chappelet, seeinghimselfe idle, and greedy after worldly goods, considering thatmounsieur musciatto (who had beene alwayes his best buckler) was nowto depart from thence, without any dreaming on the matter, andconstrained thereto (as it were) by necessity, set downe hisresolution, and answered, that hee would gladly doe it.
having made their agreement together, and received from musciattohis expresse procuration, and also the kings gracious letters; afterthat musciatto was gone on his journey, master chappelet went todijon, where he was unknowne (well-neere) of any. and there (quitefrom his naturall disposition) he beganne benignely and graciously, inrecovering the debts due; which course he tooke the rather, becausethey should have a further feeling of him in the end. being lodgedin the house of two florentine brethren, that living on their moniesusance; and (for mounsieur musciattoes sake) using him with honour andrespect: it fortuned that he fell sicke, and the two brethren sent forphysitions to attend him, allowing their servants to be diligent abouthim, making no spare of any thing, which gave the best likelyhood ofrestoring his health. but all their paines proved to no purpose,because he (honest man) being now growne aged, and having lived allhis life time very disorderly, fell day by day (according to thephysicions judgement) from bad to worse, as no other way appearedbut death, whereat the brethren greatly grieved.
upon a day, neere to the chamber where the sicke man lay, theyentred into this communication. what shall we doe (quoth the one tothe other) with this man? we are much hindered by him: for to send himaway (sicke as he is) we shall be greatly blamed thereby, and itwill be a manifest note of our weake wisedome; the people knowing thatfirst of all we gave him entertainement, and have allowed him honestphysicall attendance, and he not having any way injuried or offendedus, to let him be suddenly expulsed our house (sicke to death as heis) it can be no way for our credit.
on the other side, we are to consider also, that hee hath bin sobadde a man, as he will not now make any confession thereof, neitherreceive the blessed sacrament of the church, and dying so withoutconfession; there is no church that will accept his body, but itmust be buried in prophane ground, like to a dogge. and yet if heewould confesse himselfe, his sinnes are so many and monstrous, asthe like case also may happen, because there is not any priest orreligious person, that can or will absolve him. and being notabsolved, he must be cast into some ditch or pit, and then thepeople of the towne, as well in regard of the account we carryheere, (which to them appeareth so little pleasing, as we are dailypursued with their worst words) as also coveting our spoile andoverthrow, upon this accident will cry out and mutiny against us;behold these lombard dogs, which are not to be received into thechurch, why should we suffer them to live heere among us? in furiousmadnesse will they come upon us, and our house, where (peradventure)not contended with robbing us of our goods, our lives will remainein their mercy and danger; so that, in what sort soever it happen,this mans dying here, must needs be banefull to us.
master chappelet, who (as we have formerly saide) was lodged neereto the place where they thus conferred, having a subtle attention(as oftentimes we see sicke persons to be possessed withall) heard allthese speeches spoken of him, and causing them to bee called unto him,thus hee spake.
i would not have you to be any way doubtfull of me; neither that youshould receive the least damage by me: i have heard what you havesaid, and am certaine, that it will happen according to your words, ifmatters should fall out as you conceite; but i am minded to dealeotherwise. i have committed so many offences against our lord god,in the whole current of my life; that now i intend one action at thehoure of my death, which i trust will make amends for all. procuretherefore, i pray you, that the most holy and religious man that is tobe found (if there bee any one at all) may come unto me, and referrethe case then to me, for i will deale in such sort for you and myselfe, that all shall be well, and you no way discontented.
the two brethren, although they had no great hope in his speeches,went yet to a monastery of gray-friars, and requested; that some oneholy and learned man, might come to heare the confession of a lombard,that lay very weake and sicke in their house. and one was granted untothem, being an aged religious frier, a great read master in the sacredscripture, a very venerable person, who being of good and sanctifiedlife, all the citizens held him in great respect and esteeme, and onhee went with them to their house. when he was come up into thechamber where master chappelet lay, and being there seated downe byhim; he beganne first to comfort him very lovingly, demanding alsoof him, how many times he had bin at confession? whereto masterchappelet (who never had bin shrived in all his life time) thusreplied.
holy father, i alwayes used (as a common custome) to bee confessedonce (at the least) every weeke, albeit sometimes much more often; buttrue it is, that being falne into this sicknesse, now eight daiessince i have not beene confest, so violent hath bene the extremityof my weaknesse. my sonne (answered the good old man) thou hast donewell, and so keep thee still hereafter in that minde: but i plainlyperceive, seeing thou hast so often confessed thy selfe, that ishall take the lesse labour in urging questions to thee.
master chappelet replyed; say not so good father, for albeit ihave bene so oftentimes confessed, yet am i willing now to make agenerall confession, even of all sinnes comming to my remembrance,from the very day of my birth, until this instant houre of myshrift. and therefore i entreat you (holy father) to make a particulardemand of everie thing, even as if i had never bene confessed atall, and to make no respect of my sicknesse: for i had rather beoffensive to mine owne flesh, then by favoring or allowing it ease, tohazard the perdition of my soule, which my redeemer bought with soprecious a price.
these words were highly pleasing to the holy friar, and seemed tohim as an argument of a good conscience: wherefore, after hee had muchcommended this forwardnesse in him, he began to demand of him if hehad never offended with any woman? whereunto master chappelet(breathing forth a great sigh) answered.
holy father, i am halfe ashamed to tell you the truth in thiscase, as fearing least i should sinne in vaine-glory. whereto theconfessor replyed; speake boldly sonne, and feare not, for intelling the truth, bee it in confession or otherwise, a man cannever sinne. then sayde maister chappelet, father, seeing you giveme so good an assurance, i will resolve you faithfully heerein. i amso true a virgin-man in this matter, even as when i issued forth of mymothers wombe. o sonne (quoth the friar) how happy and blessed ofgod art thou? well hast thou lived, and therein hast thou not meanlymerited, having had so much libertie to doe the contrary if thouwouldest, wherein verie few of us can so answer for our selves.
afterward, he demanded of him, how much displeasing to god hee hadbeene in the sinne of gluttony? when (sighing againe greatly) heeanswered: too much, and too often, good father. for, over and besidethe fasts of our lent season, which everie yeare ought to bee duelyobserved by devout people, i brought my selfe to such a customarieuse, that i could fast three dayes in every weeke, with bread andwater. but indeede (holy father) i confesse, that i have drunkewater with such a pleasing appetite and delight (especially inpraying, or walking on pilgrimages) even as greedy drunkards doe, indrinking good wine. and many times i have desired such sallades ofsmall hearbes, as women do gather abroad in the open fields, andfeeding onely upon them, without coveting after any other kinde ofsustenance, hath seemed much more pleasing to me, then i thought toagree with the nature of fasting, especially, when as it swervethfrom devotion, or is not done as it ought to bee.sonne, sonne, replied the confessour, these sinnes are naturall,and very light, and therefore i would not have thee to charge thyconscience with them, more then is needfull. it happeneth to every man(how holy soever he be) that after he hath fasted overlong, feedingwill be welcome to him, and drinking good drinke after his travaile. osir, (said maister chappelet) never tell me this to comfort me, forwell you know, and i am not ignorant therein, that such things asare done for the service of god, ought all to be performed purely, andwithout any blemish of the minde; what otherwise is done, savoureth ofsinne. the friar being well contented with his words, said: it isnot amisse that thou understandest it in this manner, and thyconscience thus purely cleared, is no little comfort to me. but tellme now concerning avarice, hast thou sinned therein, by desiringmore then was reasonable, or withholding from others, such things asthou oughtst not to detaine? wherein maister chappelet answered.good father, i would not have you to imagine, because you see melodged heere in the house of two usurers, that therefore i am of anysuch disposition. no truely sir, i came hither to no other end, butonely to chastise and admonish them in friendly manner, to clensetheir mindes from such abhominable profit: and assuredly, i shouldhave prevailed therein, had not this violent sicknesse hindered mineintention. but understand (holy father) that my parents left me a richman, and immediatly after my fathers death, the greater part of hisgoods i gave away for gods sake, and then, to sustaine mine owne life,and to helpe the poore members of jesus christ, i betooke my selfeto a meane estate of merchandise, desiring none other then honestgaine thereby, and evermore whatsoever benefit came to me; iimparted halfe thereof to the poore, converting mine owne smallportion about my necessary affaires, which that other part wouldscarcely serve to supply: yet alwayes god gave thereto such amercifull blessing, that my businesse dayly thrived more and more,arising still from good to better.
well hast thou done therein good sonne, said the confessour: but howoftentimes hast thou beene angry? oh sir (said maister chappelet)therein i assure yee, i have often transgressed. and what man isable to forbeare it; beholding the dayly actions of men to be sodishonest? no care of keeping gods commandements, nor any feare of hisdreadfull judgements. many times in a day, i have rather wished myselfe dead then living, beholding youth pursuing idle vanities, tosweare and forsweare themselves, tipling in tavernes, and neverhaunting churches; but rather affecting the worlds follies, then anysuch duties as they owe to god. alas sonne (quoth the friar) this is agood and holy anger, and i can impose no penance on thee for it. buttell me, hath not rage or furie at any time so over-ruled thee, asto commit murther or man-slaughter, or to speake evill of any man,or to doe any other such kinde of injurie? oh father (answered maisterchappelet) you that seeme to be a man of god, how dare you use anysuch vile words? if i had had the very least thought, to doe anysuch act as you speake, doe you thinke that god would have suffered meto live? these are deeds of darknesse, fit for villaines and wickedlivers, of which hellish crew, when at any time i have happened tomeet with some one of them, i have said; god, god convert thee.
worthy, and charitable words, replied the friar: but tell mesonne, didst thou ever beare false witnes against any man, or hastspoken falsly, or taken ought from any one, contrary to the will ofthe owner? yes indeed father, said maister chappelet, i have spokenill of another, because i have sometime seene one of my neighbors, whowith no meane shame of the world, would do nothing else but beat hiswife: and of him once i complained to the poore mans parents,saying, that he never did it but when he was overcome with drinke.those were no ill words, quoth the friar; but i remember you said,that you were a merchant: did you ever deceive any, as somemerchants use to doe? truely father, answered m. chappelet, i thinkenot any, except one man, who one day brought me money which he owed mefor a certaine peece of cloath i sold him, and i put it into a pursewithout accounting it. about a moneth afterward, i found that therewere foure small pence more then was due to mee: and never happeningto meete with the man againe, after i had kept them the space of awhole yeare, i then gave them away unto foure poore people, for godssake.
a small matter, said the friar, and truly payed backe againe tothe owner, in bestowing them on the poore. many other questions hedemanded of him, whereto still he answered in the same manner. butbefore he proceeded to absolution, master chappelet spake thus: i haveyet one sinne more, which i have not revealed to you: when being urgedby the friar to confesse it, he said. i remember, that i should affordone day in the weeke, to cleanse the house of my soule, for betterentertainement to my lord and saviour, and yet i have done no suchreverence to the sunday or sabbath, as i ought to have done. a smallfault sonne, replyed the friar. o no (quoth master chappelet)doe not terme it a small fault, because sunday being a holy day,is highly to be reverenced: for as on that day, our blessed lord arosefrom death to life. but (quoth the confessor) hast thou done nothingelse on that day? yes, said he, being forgetfull of my selfe, once idid spet in gods church. the friar smiling, said: alas sonne, thatis a matter of no moment; for wee that are religious persons, doeuse to spet there every day. the more is your shame, answered masterchappelet, for no place ought to bee kept more pure and cleane thenthe sacred temple, wherein our daily sacrifices are offered up to god.
in this manner he held on an houre and more, uttering the liketransgressions as these; and at last began to sigh verypassionately, and to shed a few teares, as one that was skilfullenough in such dissembling pranks: whereat the confessor being muchmooved, saide: alas sonne, what aylest thou? oh father (quothchappelet) there remaineth yet one sinne more upon my conscience,wherof i never at any time made confession, so shamefull itappeareth to mee to disclose it; and i am partly perswaded, that godwill never pardon me for that sinne. how now sonne? said the friar,never say so; for if all the sinnes that ever were committed by men,or shall be committed so long as the world endureth, were onely in oneman, and he repenting them, and being so contrite for them, as i seethou art; the grace and mercy of god is so great, that upon penitentconfession, he will freely pardon him, and therefore spare not tospeake it boldly. alas father (said chappelet, still in pretendedweeping) this sinne of mine is so great, that i can hardly beleeve (ifyour earnest prayers do not assist me) that ever i shall obtaineremission for it. speake it sonne, said the friar, and feare not, ipromise that i will pray to god for thee.
master chappelet still wept and sighed, and continued silent,notwithstanding all the confessors comfortable perswasions; butafter hee had helde him a long while in suspence, breathing forth asighe, even as if his very heart would have broken, he saide; holyfather, seeing you promise to pray to god for me, i will reveale it toyou: know then, that when i was a little boy, i did once curse mymother; which he had no sooner spoken, but he wrung his hands, andgreeved extraordinarily. oh good son, saide the friar: doth that seemeso great a sinne to thee? why, men doe daily blaspheme our lord god,and yet neverthelesse, upon their hearty repentance, he is alwayesready to forgive them; and wilt not thou beleeve to obtaine remission,for a sinne so ignorantly committed? weepe no more deare sonne, butcomfort thy selfe and rest resolved, that if thou wert one of them,who nayled our blessed saviour to his crosse; yet being so trulyrepentant, as i see thou art, he would freely forgive thee. say you sofather? quoth chappelet. what mine owne deare mother? that bare mein her wombe nine moneths, day and night, and afterwards fed me withher breasts a thousand times, can i be pardoned for cursing her? ohno, it is too haynous a sinne, and except you pray to god veryinstantly for me, he will not forgive me.
when the religious man perceived, that nothing more was to beeconfessed by master chappelet; he gave him absolution, and his ownebenediction beside, reputing him to be a most holy man, as verilybeleeving all that hee had said. and who would not have done the like,hearing a man to speake in this manner, and being upon the verypoint of death? afterward, he saide unto him, master chappelet, bygods grace you may be soone restored to health, but if it so come topasse, that god doe take your blessed and well disposed soule to hismercy, will it please you to have your body buried in our convent?whereto master chappelet answered; i thanke you father for your goodmotion, and sorry should i be, if my friends did bury me any whereelse, because you have promised to pray to god for me; and beside, ihave alwayes carried a religious devotion to your order. wherefore,i beseech you, so soone as you are come home to your convent, prevaileso much by your good meanes, that the holy eucharist, consecrated thismorning on your high altar, may be brought unto me: for although iconfesse my selfe utterly unworthy, yet i purpose (by your reverendpermission) to receive it, as also your holy and latest unction, tothis ende, that having lived a greevous sinner, i may yet (at thelast) die a christian. these words were pleasing to the good olde man,and he caused every thing to be performed, according as masterchappelet had requested.
the two brethren, who much doubted the dissembling of chappelet,being both in a small partition, which sundered the sicke mans chamberfrom theirs, heard and understood the passage of all, betweene him andthe ghostly father, being many times scarcely able to refraine fromlaughter, at the fraudulent course of his confession. and often theysaid within themselves, what manner of man is this, whom neitherage, sickenesse, nor terror of death so neere approaching, andsensible to his owne soule, nor that which is much more, god, beforewhose judgement he knowes not how soone he shall appeare, or else besent to a more fearefull place; none of these can alter his wickeddisposition, but that he will needes die according as he hath lived?notwithstanding, seeing he had so ordered the matter, that he hadburiall freely allowed him, they cared for no more.
after that chappelet had received the communion, and the otherceremonies appointed for him; weakenesse encreasing on him more andmore, the very same day of his goodly confession, he died (not longafter) towards the evening. whereupon the two brethren tooke order,that all needefull things should be in a readinesse, to have himburied honourably; sending to acquaint the fathers of the conventtherewith, that they might come to say their vigilles, according toprecedent custome, and then on the morrow to fetch the body. thehonest friar that had confessed him, hearing he was dead, went tothe prior of the convent, and by sound of the house bell, caused allthe brethren to assemble together, giving them credibly to understand,that master chappelet was a very holy man, as appeared by all theparts of his confession, and made no doubt, but that many miracleswould be wrought by his sanctified body, perswading them to fetch itthither with all devoute solemnity and reverence: whereto the prior,and all the credulous brethren presently condiscended very gladly.
when night was come, they went all to visit the dead body ofmaster chappelet, where they used an especiall and solemne vigill; andon the morrow, apparelled in their richest coapes and vestiments, withbookes in their hands, and the crosse borne before them, singing inthe forme of a very devoute procession, they brought the bodypompeously into their church, accompanied with all the people of thetowne, both men and women. the father confessor, ascending up into thepulpit, preached wonderfull things of him, and the rare holinesse ofhis life; his fastes, his virginity, simplicity, innocency, and truesanctity, recounting also (among other especiall observations) whatchappelet had confessed, as this most great and greevous sinne, andhow hardly he could be perswaded, that god would grant him pardonfor it. whereby he tooke occasion to reprove the people thenpresent, saying; and you (accursed of god) for the verie least andtrifling matter hapning, will not spare to blaspheme god, hisblessed mother, and the whole court of heavenly paradise: oh, takeexample by this singular man, this saint-like man, nay, a very saintindeede.
many additions more he made, concerning his faithfulnesse, truth,and integrity; so that, by the vehement asseveration of his words(whereto all the people there present gave credible beleefe) heprovoked them unto such zeale and earnest devotion; that the sermonwas no sooner ended, but (in mighty crowds and throngs) they pressedabout the biere, kissing his hands and feete, and all the garmentsabout him were torne in peeces, as precious reliques of so holy aperson, and happy they thought themselves, that could get the smallestpeece or shred of any thing that came neere to his body: and thus theycontinued all the day, the body lying still open, to be visited inthis manner.
when night was come, they buried him in a goodly marble tombe,erected in a faire chappell purposely; and for many dayes afterfollowing, it was most strange to see, how the people of the countrycame thither on heapes, with holy candles and other offerings, withimages of waxe fastened to the tombe, in signe of sacred and solemnevowes, to this new created saint. and so farre was spread the fame andrenowne of his sanctity, devotion, and integrity of life, maintainedconstantly by the fathers of the convent; that if any one fell sickein neede, distresse, or adversity, they would make their vowes to noother saint but him: naming him (as yet to this day they do) saintchappelet, affirming upon their oathes, that infinite miracles werethere daily performed by him, and especially on such, as came indevotion to visit his shrine.
in this manner lived and died master chappelet du prat, who beforehe became a saint, was as you have heard: and i will not deny it to beimpossible, but that he may bee at rest among other blessed bodies.for although he lived lewdly and wickedly, yet such might be hiscontrition in the latest extreamity, that (questionlesse) he mightfinde mercie. but, because such things remaine unknowne to us, andspeaking by outward appearance, vulgar judgement will censureotherwise of him, and thinke him to be rather in perdition, then in soblessed a place as paradice. but referring that to the omnipotentsappointment, whose clemencie hath alwayes beene so great to us, thathe regards not our errors, but the integrity of our faith, making(by meanes of our continuall mediator) of an open enemy, a convertedsonne and servant. and as i began in his name, so will i conclude,desiring that it may evermore be had in due reverence, and referrewe our selves thereto in all our necessities, with this setledassurance, that he is alwayes ready to heare us. and so he ceased.
the first day, the second novell
wherein is contained and expressed, the liberality and
goodnesse of god, extended to the christian faith
abraham a jew, being admonished or advised by a friend of his,named jehannot de chevigny, travailed from paris unto rome: andbeholding there the wicked behaviour of men in the church, returnedbacke to paris againe, where yet (neverthelesse) he became achristian.
the novell recited by pamphilus, was highly pleasing to the company,and much commended by the ladies: and after it had beene diligentlyobserved among them, the queene commanded madam neiphila (who wasseated neerest to pamphilus) that, in relating another of hers, sheshould follow on in the pastime thus begun. she being no lessegracious in countenance, then merrily disposed; made answere, thatshee would obey her charge, and began in this manner.
pamphilus hath declared to us, by his tale, how the goodnesse of godregardeth not our errors, when they proceede from things which weecannot discerne. and i intend to approove by mine, what argument ofinfallible truth, the same benignity delivereth of it selfe, byenduring patiently the faults of them, that (both in word and worke)should declare unfaigned testimony of such gracious goodnesse, and notto live so dissolutely as they doe. to the end, that othersillumined by their light of life, may beleeve with the strongerconstancy of minde.
as i have heeretofore heard (gracious ladies) there lived awealthy marchant in paris, being a mercer, or seller of silkes,named jehannot de chevigny, a man of faithfull, honest, and uprightdealing; who held great affection and friendship with a very rich jew,named abraham, that was a merchant also, and a man of very directconversation. jehannot well noting the honesty and loyall dealing ofthis jew, began to have a religious kinde of compassion in hissoule, much pittying that a man so good in behaviour, so wise anddiscreete in all his actions, should be in danger of perditionthorow want of faith. in which regard, lovingly he began to intreatehim, that he would leave the errors of his jewish beleefe, andfollow the truth of christianity, which he evidently saw (as beinggood and holy) daily to prosper and enlarge it selfe, whereas on thecontrary, his profession decreased, and grew to nothing.
the jew made answer, that he beleeved nothing to be so good andholy, as the jewish religion, and having beene borne therein, thereinalso he purposed to live and dye, no matter whatsoever being able toremove him from that resolution. for all this stiffe deniall,jehannot would not so give him over; but pursued him still day byday, reitterating continually his former speeches to him: deliveringinfinite excellent and pregnant reasons, that merchants themselveswere not ignorant, how farre the christian faith excelled the jewishfalshoods. and albeit the jew was a very learned man in his ownelaw, yet notwithstanding the intire amity he bare to jehannot, or(perhaps) his words fortified by the blessed spirit, were soprevailant with him, that the jew felt a pleasing apprehension inthem, though as yet his obstinacie stoode farre off from conversion.but as he thus continued strong in opinion, so jehannot lefte nothourely to labour him: insomuch, that the jew being conquered bysuch earnest and continuall importunity, one day spake to jehannot,saying.
my worthy friend jehannot, thou art extremely desirous, that ishould convert to christianitie, and i am well contented to doe it;onely upon this condition: that first i wil journey to rome, to seehim whom thou sayest, is gods general vicar here on earth, and toconsider on the course of his life and manners, and likewise of hiscolledge of cardinals. if he and they doe appeare such men to mee,as thy speeches affirme them to be, and thereby i may comprehendthat thy faith and religion is better then mine, as with no meanepaines thou endevourest to perswade mee, i will become a christianas thou art: but if i finde it otherwise, i will continue as i am, ajew.
jehannot hearing these words, became exceeding sorrowfull, and saydwithin himselfe; i have lost all the paines which i did thinke to bewell employed, as hoping to have this man converted heere. for, ifhe go to the court of rome, and behold there the wickednes of thepriests lives, farewell all hope in me, of ever seeing him to become achristian. but rather, were he already a christian, without allquestion he would turne a jew. and so going neerer to abraham, hesaid. alas my loving friend, why shouldst thou undertake such atedious travel, and so great a charge, as thy journey from hence torome will cost thee? consider, that to a rich man (as thou art)travaile by land or sea is full of infinite dangers. doest thou notthinke, that here are religious men enow, who wil gladly bestowbaptisme upon thee? to mee therefore it plainely appeareth, thatsuch a voyage is to no purpose. if thou standest upon any doubt orscruple, concerning the faith whereto i wish thee; where canst thoudesire conference with greater doctours, or men more learned in allrespects, then this famous cittie doth affoord thee, to resolve theein any questionable case? thou must thinke, that the prelates are suchthere, as heere thou seest them to be, and yet they must needes bein much better condition at rome, because they are neere to theprincipall pastor. and therefore, if thou wilt credit my counsell,reserve this journey to some time more convenient, when the jubilee ofgenerall pardon happeneth, and then (perchance) i will beare theecompany, and go along with thee as in vowed pilgrimage.
whereto the jew replyed: i beleeve jehannot that all which thou hastsaid, may be so. but, to make short with thee, i am fully determined(if thou wouldst have me a christian, as thou instantly urgest me tobee) to goe thither, for otherwise, i will continue as i am.jehannot perceyving his setled purpose, said: goe then in gods name.but perswaded himselfe, that hee would never become a christian, afterhe had once seene the court of rome: neverthelesse, he counted hislabour not altogither lost, in regard he bestowed it to a good end,and honest intentions are to be commended.
the jew mounted on horse-backe, and made no lingering in his journeyto rome; where being arrived, he was very honourably entertained byother jewes dwelling in rome. and during the time of his abiding there(without revealing to any one the reason of his comming thither)very heedfully he observed the maner of the popes life, of thecardinals, prelates, and all the courtiers. and being a man verydiscreet and judicious, hee apparantly perceived, both by his owneeye, and further information of friends; that from the highest tothe lowest (without any restraint, remorse of conscience, shame, orfeare of punishment) all sinned in abhominable luxurie, and notnaturally onely, but in foule sodomie, so that the credite ofstrumpets and boyes was not small, and yet might be too easilyobtayned. moreover, drunkards, belly-gods, and servants of the paunch,more then of any thing else (even like brutish beasts after theirluxury) were every where to be met withall. and upon furtherobservation, hee saw all men so covetous and greedie of coyne, thatevery thing was bought and solde for ready money, not onely theblood of men, but (in plaine termes) the faith of christians, yea, andmatters of divinest qualities, how, or to whomsoever appertaining,were it for sacrifices or benefices, whereof was made no meanmerchandize, and more brokers were there to be found (then in parisattending upon all trades) of manifest symonie, under the nice name ofnegotiation, and for gluttony, not sustentation: even as if god hadnot knowne the signification of vocables, nor the intentions of wickedhearts, but would suffer himselfe to bee deceived by the outward namesof things, as wretched men commonly use to doe.
these things, and many more (fitter for silence, then forpublication) were so deepely displeasing to the jew, being a mostsober and modest man; that he had soone seene enough, resolving on hisreturne to paris, which very speedily he performed. and whenjehannot heard of his arrivall, crediting much rather other newes fromhim, then ever to see him a converted christian; he went to welcomehim, and kindly they feasted one another. after some few dayes ofresting, jehannot demanded of him; what he thought of our holyfather the pope and his cardinals, and generally of all the othercourtiers? whereto the jew readily answered; it is strange jehannot,that god should give them so much as he doth. for i will truely tellthee, that if i had beene able to consider all those things, whichthere i have both heard and seene: i could then have resolved myselfe, never to have found in any priest, either sanctity, devotion,good worke, example of honest life, or any good thing else beside. butif a man desire to see luxury, avarice, gluttony, and such wickedthings, yea, worse, if worse may be, and held in generall estimationof all men; let him but goe to rome, which i thinke rather to be theforge of damnable actions, then any way leaning to grace or goodnesse.and, for ought i could perceive, me thinkes your chiefe pastour, and(consequently) all the rest of his dependants, doe strive so much asthey may (with all their engine arte and endevour) to bring tonothing, or else to banish quite out of the world, christian religion,whereof they should be the support and foundation.
but because i perceive, that their wicked intent will never cometo passe, but contrariwise, that your faith enlargeth it selfe,shining every day much more cleare and splendant: i gather therebyevidently, that the blessed spirit is the true ground and defencethereof, as being more true and holy then any other. in which respect,whereas i stood stiffe and obstinate against the good admonitions, andnever minded to become a christian: now i freely open my heart untothee, that nothing in the world can or shall hinder me, but i willbe a christian, as thou art. let us therefore presently goe to thechurch, and there (according to the true custome of your holyfaiths) helpe me to be baptized.
jehannot, who expected a farre contrary conclusion then this,hearing him speake it with such constancy; was the very gladdest manin the world, and went with him to the church of nostre dame in paris,where he requested the priests there abiding, to bestow baptisme onabraham, which they joyfully did, hearing him so earnestly to desireit. jehannot was his godfather, and named him john, and afterward,by learned divines he was more fully instructed in the grounds ofour faith; wherein he grew of great understanding, and led a veryvertuous life.
the first day, the third novell
whereby the author, approving the christian faith,
sheweth, how beneficiall a sodaine and ingenious answere
may fall out to bee, especially when a man finds himselfe
in some evident danger
melchisedech a jew, by recounting a tale of three rings, to thegreat soldan, named saladine, prevented a great danger which wasprepared for him.
madame neiphila having ended her discourse, which was well allowedof by all the company; it pleased the queene, that madame philomenashould next succeede in order, who thus began.
the tale delivered by neiphila, maketh mee remember a doubtfullcase, which sometime hapned to another jew. and because that god,and the truth of his holy faith, hath bene already very welldiscoursed on: it shall not seeme unfitting (in my poore opinion) todescend now into the accidents of men. wherefore, i will relate amatter unto you, which being attentively heard and considered; maymake you much more circumspect, in answering to divers questions anddemands, then (perhaps) otherwise you would be. consider then (mostwoorthy assembly) that like as folly or dulnesse, many times hathoverthrowne some men from place of eminencie, into most great andgreevous miseries: even so, discreet sense and good understanding,hath delivered many out of irksome perils, and seated them in safestsecurity. and to prove it true, that folly hath made many fall fromhigh authority, into poore and despised calamity; may be avouched byinfinite examples, which now were needelesse to remember: but, thatgood sense and able understanding, may proove to be the occasion ofgreat desolation, without happy prevention, i will declare unto you invery few words, and make it good according to my promise.
saladine, was a man so powerfull and valiant, as not onely hisvery valour made him soldan of babylon, and also gave him many signallvictories, over kings of the sarrazens, and of christians likewise.having in divers warres, and other magnificent employments, of hisowne, wasted all his treasure, and (by reason of some sodaine accidenthappening to him) standing in neede to use some great summe ofmoney, yet not readily knowing where, or how to procure it; heremembred a rich jew named melchisedech, that lent out money to use orinterest in the city of alexandria. this man he imagined best ableto furnish him, if he could be won to do it willingly: but he wasknowne to be so gripple and miserable, that hardly any meanes woulddrawe him to it. in the end, constrained by necessity, and labouringhis wits for some apt device whereby he might have it: he concluded,though hee might not compell him to do it, yet by a practiseshadowed with good reason to ensnare him. and having sent for him,entertained him very familiarly in his court, and sitting downe byhim, thus began.
honest man, i have often heard it reported by many, that thou artvery skilfull, and in cases concerning god, thou goest beyond allother of these times: wherefore, i would gladly bee informed bythee, which of those three lawes or religions, thou takest to betruest; that of the jew, the other of the sarazen, or that of thechristian? the jew, being a very wise man, plainely perceived, thatsaladine sought to entrap him in his answere, and so to raise somequarrell against him. for, if he commended any one of those lawesabove the other, he knew that saladine had what he aymed at.wherefore, bethinking himselfe to shape such an answere, as might noway trouble or entangle him: summoning all his sences together, andconsidering, that dallying with the soldane might redound to his nomeane danger, thus he replied.
my lord, the question propounded by you, is faire and worthy, and toanswere my opinion truely thereof, doth necessarily require sometime of consideration, if it might stand with your liking to allow it:but if not, let me first make entrance to my reply, with a prettytale, and well worth the hearing. i have oftentimes heard it reported,that (long since) there was a very wealthy man, who (among otherprecious jewels of his owne) had a goodly ring of great valew; thebeauty and estimation whereof, made him earnestly desirous to leave itas a perpetuall memory and honour to his successors. whereupon, hewilled and ordained, that he among his male children, with whom thisring (being left by the father) should be found in custody after hisdeath; hee and none other, was to bee reputed his heire, and to behonoured and reverenced by all the rest, as being the prime andworthiest person. that sonne, to whom this ring was left by him,kept the same course to his posterity, dealing (in all respects) ashis predecessor had done; so that (in short time) the ring (fromhand to hand) had many owners by legacie.
at length, came to the hand of one, who had three sonnes, all ofthem goodly and vertuous persons, and verie obedient to theirfather: in which regard, he affected them all equally, without anydifference or partiall respect. the custome of this ring beingknowne to them, each one of them (coveting to beare esteeme abovethe other) desired (as hee could best make his meanes) his father,that in regard he was now growne very old, he would leave that ring tohim, whereby he should bee acknowledged for his heire. the good man,who loved no one of them more then the other, knew not how to make hischoise, nor to which of them he should leave the ring: yet having pasthis promise to them severally, he studied by what meanes to satisfiethem all three. wherefore, secretly having conferred with a curiousand excellent goldsmith, hee caused two other rings to bee made, soreally resembling the first made ring, that himselfe (when he had themin his hand) could not distinguish which was the right one.
lying upon his death-bed, and his sonnes then plying him by theirbest opportunities, he gave to each of them a ring. and they (afterhis death) presuming severally upon their right to the inheritance andhonor, grew to great contradiction and square: each man producing thenhis ring, which were so truely all alike in resemblance, as no onecould know the right ring from the other. and therefore, suite in law,to distinguish the true heire to his father, continued long time,and so it dooth yet to this very day. in like manner my good lord,concerning those three lawes given by god the father, to three suchpeople as you have propounded: each of them do imagine that theyhave the heritage of god, and his true law, and also duely to performehis commandements; but which of them do so indeede, the question (asof the three rings) is yet remaining.
saladine well perceyving, that the jew was too cunning to bee caughtin his snare, and had answered so well, that to doe him furtherviolence, would redound unto his perpetuall dishonour; resolved toreveale his neede and extremity, and try if hee would therein friendlysted him. having disclosed the matter, and how he purposed to havedealt with him, if he had not returned so wise an answere; the jewlent him so great a sum of money as hee demanded, and saladine repayedit againe to him justly, giving him other great gifts beside:respecting him as his especiall friend, and maintaining him in veryhonourable condition, neere unto his owne person.
the first day, the fourth novell
wherein may bee noted, that such men as will reprove those
errours in others, which remaine in themselves, commonly are
the authors of their owne reprehension
a monke having committed an offence, deserving to be very greevouslypunished, freed himselfe from the paine to be inflicted on him, bywittily reprehending his abbot, with the very same fault.
so ceased madame philotnena, after the conclusion of her tale:when dioneus sitting next unto her, (without tarrying for any othercommand from the queene, knowing by the order formerly begun, that heewas to follow in the same course) spake in this manner.
gracious ladies, if i faile not in understanding your generallintention, we are purposely assembled heere to tell tales; andespecially such as may please our selves. in which respect, becausenothing shold be done disorderly, i hold it lawfull for every one(as our queene decreed before her dignity) to relate such anoveltie, as in their owne judgement may cause most contentment.wherefore having heard that by the good admonitions of jehannot dechevigny, abraham the jew was advised to the salvation of his soule,and melchisedech (by his witty understanding) defended his riches fromthe traines of saladine: i now purpose to tell you in a few plainewords, without feare of receiving any reprehension, how cunningly amonke compassed his deliverance, from a punishment intended towardshim.
there was in the country of lunigiana (which is not far distant fromour owne) a monastery, which sometime was better furnished withholinesse and religion, then now adayes they are: wherein lived (amongdivers other) a yong novice monke, whose hot and lusty disposition(being in the vigour of his yeeres) was such, as neither fasts norprayers had any great power over him. it chanced on a fasting dayabout high noon, when all the other monkes were asleep in theirdormitaries or dorters, this frolicke friar was walking alone in theirchurch, which stoode in a very solitarie place, where ruminating onmany matters by himselfe, hee espyed a prettie handsome wench (somehusbandmans daughter in the countrey, that had beene gatheringrootes and hearbes in the field) upon her knees before in altar;whom he had no sooner seene, but immediately hee felt effeminatetemptations, and such as ill fitted with his profession.
lascivious desire, and no religious devotion, made him draw neereher, and whether under shrift (the onely cloake to compasse carnalaffections) or some other as close conference to as pernitious andvile a purpose, i know not: but so farre he prevailed upon herfrailety, and such a bargaine passed betweene them, that from thechurch, he wonne her to his chamber, before any person couldperceive it. now, while this yong lusty monke (transported withoverfond affection) was more carelesse of his dalliance, then heshould have bene: the lord abbot being newly arisen from sleepe, andwalking softly about the cloyster, came to the monkes dorter doore,where hearing what noyse was made betweene them, and a femininevoyce more strange then hee was wont to heare; he layed his eare closeto the chamber doore, and plainly perceived, that a woman waswithin. wherewith being much moved, he intended sodainly to make himopen the doore; but (upon better consideration) hee conceyved it farremore fitting for him, to returne backe to his owne chamber, andtarry till the monke should come forth.
the monke, though his delight with the damosell was extraordinary,yet feare and suspition followed upon it; for, in the very height ofall his wantonnesse, he heard a soft treading about the doore. andprying thorow a small crevice in the same dore, perceived apparantly,that the abbot himselfe stood listening there, and could not beignorant but that the maide was with him in the chamber. as afterpleasure ensueth paine, for the veniall monke knew well enough (thoughwanton heate would not let him heede it before) that most greevouspunishment must bee inflicted on him, which made him sad beyond allmeasure: neverthelesse, without disclosing his dismay to the yongmaiden, he began to consider with himselfe on many meanes, wherebyto find out one that might best fit his turne. and suddenlyconceited an apt stratagem, which sorted to such effect as he wouldhave it: whereupon, seeming satisfied for that season, he tolde thedamosell, that (being carefull of her credit) as hee had brought herin unseene of any, so he would free her from thence againe, desiringher to tarrie there (without making any noyse at all) untill such timeas he returned to her.
going forth of the chamber, and locking it fast with the key, hewent directly to the lord abbots lodging, and delivering him the saidekey (as every monke used to doe the like, when he went abroade outof the convent) setting a good countenance on the matter, boldlysaide; my lord, i have not yet brought in all my part of the wood,which lieth ready cut downe in the forrest; and having nowconvenient time to doe it, if you please to give me leave, i willgoe and fetch it. the abbot perswading himselfe, that he had not beenediscovered by the monke, and to be resolved more assuredly in theoffence committed; being not a little jocund of so happy anaccident, gladly tooke the key, and gave him leave to fetch the wood.
no sooner was he gone, but the abbot beganne to consider withhimselfe, what he were best to doe in this case, either (in thepresence of all the other monkes) to open the chamber doore, that sothe offence being knowne to them all, they might have no occasion ofmurmuring against him, when he proceeded in the monkes punishment;or rather should first understand of the damosell her selfe, how,and in what manner shee was brought thither. furthermore, heconsidered, that shee might be a woman of respect, or some such mansdaughter, as would not take it well, to have her disgraced beforeall the monkes. wherefore hee concluded, first to see (himselfe)what shee was, and then (afterward) to resolve upon the rest. so goingvery softly to the chamber, and entring in, locked the doore fast withthe key, when the poore damosell thinking it had beene the gallantyoung monke; but finding it to be the lord abbot, shee fell on herknees weeping, as fearing now to receive publike shame, by beingbetrayed in this unkinde manner.
my lord abbot looking demurely on the maide, and perceiving her tobe faire, feate, and lovely; felt immediately (although he was olde)no lesse spurring on to fleshly desires, then the young monke beforehad done; whereupon he beganne to conferre thus privately withhimselfe. why should i not take pleasure, when i may freely have it?cares and molestations i endure every day, but sildome find suchdelights prepared for me. this is a delicate sweete young damosell,and here is no eye that can discover me. if i can enduce her to doe asi would have her, i know no reason why i should gaine-say it. no mancan know it, or any tongue blaze it abroade; and sinne so concealed,is halfe pardoned. such a faire fortune as this is, perhapshereafter will never befall me; and therefore i hold it wisedome, totake such a benefit when a man may enjoy it.
upon this immodest meditation, and his purpose quite altered whichhe came for; he went neerer to her, and very kindly began to comforther, desiring her to forbeare weeping: and (by further insinuatingspeeches) acquainted her with his amorous intention. the maide, whowas made neither of yron nor diamond, and seeking to prevent one shameby another, was easily wonne to the abbots will, which caused him toembrace and kisse her often.
our lusty young novice monke, whom the abbot imagined to bee gonefor wood, had hid himselfe aloft upon the roofe of the dorter,where, when he saw the abbot enter alone into the chamber, he lost agreat part of his former feare, promising to himselfe a kinde ofperswasion, that somewhat would ensue to his better comfort; butwhen he beheld him lockt into the chamber, then his hope grew toundoubted certainty. a little chincke or crevice favoured him, whereathe could both heare and see, whatsoever was done or spoken by them:so, when the abbot thought hee had staide long enough with thedamosell, leaving her still there, and locking the doore fastagaine, hee returned thence to his owne chamber.
within some short while after, the abbot knowing the monke to bein the convent, and supposing him to be lately returned with the wood,determined to reprove him sharpely, and to have him closelyimprisoned, that the damosell might remaine solie to himselfe. andcausing him to be called presently before him, with a very stearne andangry countenance, giving him many harsh and bitter speeches,commanded, that he should be clapt in prison.
the monke very readily answered, saying. my good lord, i have notyet beene so long in the order of saint benedict, as to learne all theparticularities thereto belonging. and beside sir, you never shewedmee or any of my brethren, in what manner we young monkes ought to usewomen, as you have otherwise done for our custome of prayer andfasting. but seeing you have so lately therein instructed mee, andby your owne example how to doe it: i heere solemnely promise you,if you please to pardon me but this one error, i will never failetherein againe, but dayly follow what i have seene you doe.
the abbot, being a man of quicke apprehension, perceived instantlyby this answere; that the monke not onely knew as much as he did,but also had seene (what was intended) that hee should not. wherefore,finding himselfe to be as faulty as the monke, and that hee couldnot shame him, but worthily had deserved as much himselfe; pardoninghim, and imposing silence on eithers offence: they convayed thepoore abused damosell forth of their doores, she purposing (neverafter) to transgresse in the like manner.
the first day, the fift novell
declaring, that wise and vertuous ladies, ought to hold
their chastitie in more esteeme, then the greatnesse and
treasures of princes: and that a discreete lord should not
offer modestie violence
the lady marquesse of montferrat, with a banquet of hennes, anddivers other gracious speeches beside, repressed the fond love ofthe king of france.
the tale reported by dioneus, at the first hearing of the ladies,began to rellish of some immodestie, as the bashfull blood mounting upinto their faces, delivered by apparant testimonie. and beholdingone another with scarse-pleasing lookes, during all the time it was indiscoursing, no sooner had he concluded: but with a few milde andgentle speeches, they gave him a modest reprehension, and meaning tolet him know that such tales ought not to be tolde among women.afterward, the queene commaunded madam fiammetta, (sitting on abanke of flowers before her) to take her turne as next in order; andshe, smiling with such a virgin blush, as very beautifully became her,began in this manner.
it is no little joy to mee, that we understand so well (by thediscourses already past) what power consisteth in the delivery of wiseand readie answeres; and because it is a great part of sence andjudgement in men, to affect women of greater birth and quality thenthemselves, as also an admirable fore-sight in women, to keepe offfrom being surprized in love, by lords going beyond them in degree:a matter offereth it selfe to my memory, well deserving my speechand your attention, how a gentlewoman (both in word and deede)should defend her honor in that kind, when importunity laboureth tobetray it.
the marquesse of montferrat was a worthy and valiant knight, whobeing captaine generall for the church, the necessary service requiredhis company on the seas, in a goodly army of the christians againstthe turkes. upon a day, in the court of king philip, sirnamed theone eyed king (who likewise made preparation in france, for a royallassistance to that expedition) as many speeches were delivered,concerning the valour and manhoode of this marquesse: it fortuned,that a knight was then present, who knew him very familiarly, and hegave an addition to the former commendation, that the whole worldcontained not a more equall couple in marriage, then the marquesse andhis lady. for, as among all knights, the marquesse could hardly beparaleld for armes and honour; even so his wife, in comparison ofall other ladies, was scarcely matchable for beauty and vertue.which words were so weighty in the apprehension of king philip, thatsodainly (having as yet never seen her) he began to affect her veryearnestly, concluding to embarke himselfe at gennes or genoua, thereto set forward on the intended voyage, and journying thither byland, hee would shape some honest excuse to see the lady marquesse,whose lord being then from home, opinion perswaded him over fondly,that he should easily obtaine the issue of his amorous desire.
when hee was come within a dayes journey, where the ladiemarquesse then lay; he sent her word that she should expect hiscompany on the morrow at dinner. the lady, being singularly wise andjudicious, answered the messenger, that she reputed the kingscomming to her, as an extraordinary grace and favour, and that heshould bee most heartily welcome. afterward, entring into furtherconsideration with her selfe, what the king might meane by his privatevisitation, knowing her husband to be from home, and it to bee nomeane barre to his apter entertainement: at last she discreetlyconceited (and therin was not deceived) that babling report of herbeauty and perfections, might thus occasion the kings comming thither,his journey lying else a quite contrary way. notwithstanding, beinga princely lady, and so loyal a wife as ever lived shee intended togive him her best entertainement: summoning the chiefest gentlemenin the country together, to take due order (by their advice) forgiving the king a gracious welcome. but concerning the dinner, anddiet for service to his table, that remained onely at her owndisposing.
sending presently abroad, and buying all the hennes that the countryaffoorded, shee commaunded her cookes, that onely of them (without anyother provision beside) they should prepare all the services that theycould devise. on the morrow, the king came according to his promise,and was most honourably welcomed by the lady, who seemed in his eye(far beyond the knights speeches of her) the fairest creature thatever he had seene before; whereat he mervailed not a little, extollingher perfections to be peerelesse, which much the more enflamed hisaffections, and (almost) made his desires impatient. the king beeingwithdrawne into such chambers, as orderly were prepared for him, andas beseemed so great a prince: the houre of dinner drawing on, theking and the lady marquesse were seated at one table, and hisattendants placed at other tables, answerable to their degrees ofhonour.
plenty of dishes being served in, and the rarest wines that thecountrey yeelded, the king had more minde to the faire lady marques,then any meate that stood on the table. neverthelesse, observingeach service after other, and that all the viands (though variouslycooked, and in divers kindes) were nothing else but hennes onely, hebegan to wonder; and so much the rather, because he knew the countryto be of such quality, that it afforded all plenty both of fowlesand venison: beside, after the time of his comming was heard, they hadrespite enough, both for hawking and hunting; and therefore itencreased his marvell the more, that nothing was provided for him, buthennes onely: wherein to be the better resolved, turning a merrycountenance to the lady, thus he spake. madam, are hennes onely bredin this country, and no cockes? the lady marquesse, very wellunderstanding his demand, which fitted her with an apt opportunity, tothwart his idle hope, and defend her owne honour; boldly returnedthe king this answere. not so my lord, but women and wives,howsoever they differ in garments and graces one from another; yetnotwithstanding, they are all heere as they bee in other places.
when the king heard this reply, he knew well enough the occasionof his henne dinner, as also, what vertue lay couched under heranswere; perceiving apparantly, that wanton words would prove but invaine, and such a woman was not easily to be seduced; wherefore, ashee grew enamored on her inconsiderately, so he found it bestfitting for his honour, to quench this heate with wisedome discreetly.and so, without any more words, or further hope of speeding in sounkingly a purpose, dinner being ended, by a sudden departing, hesmoothly shadowed the cause of his comming, and thanking her for thehonour shee had done him, commended her to her chaste disposition, andposted away with speede to gennes.
the first day, the sixt novell
declaring, that in few, discreete, and well placed words,
the covered craft of church-men may bee justly reproved, and
their hypocrisie honestly discovered
an honest plaine meaning man, (simply and conscionably)reprehended the malignity, hypocrisie, and misdemeanour of manyreligious persons.
madam aemilia sitting next to the gentle lady fiammetta,perceiving the modest chastisement, which the vertuous ladymarquesse had given to the king of france, was generally graced by thewhole assembly; began (after the queene had thereto appointed her)in these words. nor will i conceale the deserved reprehension, whichan honest simple lay-man, gave to a covetous holy father, in veryfew words; yet more to be commended, then derided.
not long since (worthy ladies) there dwelt in our owne nativecity, a friar minor, an inquisitor after matters of faith; who,although he laboured greatly to seeme a sanctified man, and an earnestaffecter of christian religion, (as all of them appeare to be inoutward shew;) yet he was a much better inquisitor after them that hadtheir purses plenteously stored with money, then of such as wereslenderly grounded in faith. by which diligent continued care inhim, he found out a man, more rich in purse, then understanding; andyet not so defective in matters of faith, as misguided by his ownesimple speaking, and (perhaps) when his braine was well warmed withwine, words fell more foolishly from him, then in better judgementthey could have done.
being on a day in company, (very little differing in quality fromhim selfe) he chanced to say; that he had beene at such good wine,as god himselfe did never drinke better. which words (by somesicophant then in presence) being carried to this curiousinquisitor, and he well knowing, that the mans faculties were great,and his bagges swolne up full with no meane abundance: cum gladijset fustibus; with booke, bell, and candle, he raysed an hoast ofexecrations against him, and the sumner cited him with a solemneprocesse to appeare before him, understanding sufficiently, thatthis course would sooner fetch money from him, then amend anymisbeliefe in the man; for no further reformation did he seeke after.
the man comming before him, hee demanded, if the accusationintimated against him, was true or no? whereto the honest mananswered, that he could not denie the speaking of such words, anddeclared in what manner they were uttered. presently the inquisitor,most devoutly addicted to saint john with the golden beard, saide;what? doest thou make our lord a drinker, and a curious quaffer ofwines, as if he were a glutton, a belly-god, or a taverne haunter,as thou, and other drunkards are. being an hypocrite, as thou art,thou thinkest this to be but a light matter, because it may seeme soin thine owne opinion: but i tell thee plainely, that it deservethfire and faggot, if i should proceede in justice to inflict it onthee: with these, and other such like threatning words, as also a verystearne and angry countenance, he made the man beleeve himselfe tobe an epicure, and that hee denied the eternity of the soule;whereby he fell into such a trembling feare, as doubting indeede,least he should be burned; that, to be more mercifully dealt withal,he rounded him in the eare, and by secret meanes, so annointed hishands with saint johns golden grease (a verie singular remedie againstthe disease pestilentiall in covetous priests, especially friarsminors, that dare touch no money) as the case became very quicklyaltered.
this soveraigne unction was of such vertue (though galen speakes nota word thereof among all his cheefest medicines) and so farreprevailed, that the terrible threatning words of fire and faggot,became meerly frozen up, and gracious language blew a more gentleand calmer ayre; the inquisitor delivering him an hallowedcrucifixe, creating him a soldier of the crosse (because he hadpayed crosses good store for it,) and even as if he were to travellunder that standard to the holy land; so did hee appoint him ahome-paying pennance, namely, to visit him thrice every weeke in hischamber, and to annoint his hands with the selfe-same yellowunguent, and afterward, to heare masse of the holy crosse, visitinghim also at dinner time, which being ended, to do nothing all the restof the day, but according as he directed him.
the simple man, yet not so simple, but seeing that this weekelygreazing the inquisitors hands, would in time graspe away all hisgold, grew weary of this annointing, and began to consider withhimselfe, how to stay the course of this chargeable penance. andcomming one morning (according to his injunction) to heare masse, inthe gospell he observed these words; you shall receive an hundredfor one, and so possesse eternall life; which saying, he keptperfectly in his memory: and as he was commanded, at dinner time, hecame to the inquisitor, finding him (among his fellowes) seated at thetable. the inquisitor presently demaunded of him, whether he had heardmasse that morning, or no? yes sir, replyed the man very readily. hastthou heard any thing therein (quoth the inquisitor) whereof thou artdoubtfull, or desirst to be further informed? surely sir, answered theplaine-meaning man, i make no doubt of any thing i have heard, butdo beleeve all constantly: onely one thing troubleth me much, andmaketh me very compassionate of you, and of all these holy fathersyour brethren, perceiving in what wofull and wretched estate youwill be, when you shall come into another world. what words are these,quoth the inquisitor? and why art thou moved to such compassion of us?o good sir, saide the man, do you remember the wordes in the gospellthis morning, you shall receive an hundred for one? that is verie truereplyed the inquisitor, but what mooveth thee to urge those words?i will tell you sir, answered the plain fellow, so it might pleaseyou not to be offended. since the time of my resorting hither, ihave daily seene many poore people at your doore, and (out of yourabundance) when you and your brethren have fed sufficiently, every onehath had a good messe of pottage: now sir, if for every dishfullgiven, you are sure to receive an hundred againe, you will all bemeerely drowned in pottage. although the rest (sitting at the tablewith the inquisitor) laughed heartily at this jest; yet he foundhimselfe toucht in another nature, having hypocritically received forone poore offence, above three hundred peeces of gold, and not a miteto be restored againe. but fearing to be further disclosed, yetthreatning him with another processe in law, for abusing the words ofthe gospel, he was content to dismisse him for altogither, withoutany more golden greasing in the hand.
the first day, the seventh novell
approving, that it is much unfitting for a prince, or great
person, to bee covetous; but rather to be liberall to
all men
bergamino, by telling a tale of a skilfull man, named primasso,and of an abbot of clugni; honestly checked a new kinde ofcovetousnesse, in mayster can de la scala.
the courteous demeanor of madam aemilia, and the quaintnesse ofher discourse, caused both the queene, and the rest of the company, tocommend the invention of carrying the crosse, and the goldenoyntment appointed for pennance. afterward, philostratus, who was inorder to speake next, began in this manner.
it is a commendable thing (faire ladies) to hit a but that neverstirreth out of his place: but it is a matter much more admirable,to see a thing suddainely appearing, and sildome or never frequentedbefore, to bee as suddenly hit by an ordinary archer. the viciousand polluted lives of priests, yeeldeth matter of it selfe in manythings, deserving speech and reprehension, as a true but of wickednes,and well worthy to be sharply shot at. and therefore, though thathonest meaning man did wisely, in touching master inquisitor to thequicke, with the hypocriticall charity of monkes and friars, in givingsuch things to the poore, as were more meete for swine, or to be worsethrowne away, yet i hold him more to be commended, who (by occasion ofa former tale, and which i purpose to relate) pleasantly reproovedmaster can de la scala, a magnifico and mighty lord, for a suddenand unaccustomed covetousnesse appearing in him, figuring by othermen, that which hee intended to say of him, in manner following.
master can de la scala, as fame ranne abroad of him in all places,was (beyond the infinite favours of fortune towards him) one of themost notable and magnificent lords that ever lived in italy, since thedaies of fredericke the second, emperor. he determining to procure avery solemne assembly at verona, and many people being met therefrom divers places, especially gentlemen of all degrees; suddenly(upon what occasion i know not) his minde altred, and hee would notgoe forward with his intention. most of them he partly recompencedwhich were come thither, and they dismissed to depart at theirpleasure, one onely man remained unrespected, or in any kinde sortsent away, whose name was bergamino, a man very pleasantly disposed,and so wittily readie in speaking and answering, as none couldeasily credit it, but such as heard him; and although his recompenceseemed over-long delayed, yet hee made no doubt of a beneficiallending.
by some enemies of his, master can de la scala was incensed, thatwhatsoever he gave or bestowed on him, was as ill imployed and utterlylost, as if it were throwne into the fire, and therefore he neitherdid or spake any thing to him. some few dayes being passed over, andbergamino perceiving, that hee was neither called, nor any accountmade of, notwithstanding many manly good parts in him; observingbeside, that hee found a shrewd consumption in his purse, his inne,horses, and servants, being chargeable to him, he began to growextremely melancholly, and yet hee attended in expectation day by day,as thinking it farre unfitting for him, to depart before he was biddenfarewell.
having brought with him thither three goodly rich garments, whichhad beene given him by sundrie lords, for his more sightlyappearance at this great meeting; the importunate host being greedieof payment, first he delivered him one of them, and yet not halfethe score being wiped off, the second must needes follow; andbeside, except he meant to leave his lodging, hee must live upon thethird so long as it would last, till hee saw what end his hopeswould sort too. it fortuned, during the time of living thus upon hislast refuge, that hee met with maister can one day at dinner, where hepresented himselfe before him, with a discontented countenance:which maister can well observing, more to distaste him, then takedelight in any thing that could come from him, he sayd. bergamino, howcheerest thou? thou art very melancholly, i prythee tell us why?bergamino suddenly, without any premeditation, yet seeming as if hehad long considered thereon, reported this tale.
sir, i have heard of a certaine man, named primasso, one skilfullylearned in the grammar, and (beyond all other) a very witty andready versifier: in regard whereof, he was so much admired, andfarre renowned, that such as never saw him, but onely heard of him,could easily say, this is primasso. it came to passe, that beingonce at paris, in poore estate, as commonly he could light on nobetter fortune (because vertue is slenderly rewarded, by such ashave the greatest possessions) he heard much fame of the abbot ofclugni, a man reputed (next to the pope) to be the richest prelateof the church. of him he heard wonderfull and magnificent matters,that he alwayes kept an open and hospitable court, and never maderefusall of any (from whence soever hee came or went) but they dideate and drinke freely there; provided, that they came when theabbot was set at the table. primasso hearing this, and being anearnest desirer to see magnificent and vertuous men, hee resolved togoe see this rare bounty of the abbot, demanding how far he dwelt fromparis? being answered, about some three leagues thence. primassomade account, that if he went on betimes in the morning, he shouldeasily reach thither before the houre for dinner.
being instructed in the way, and not finding any to walke along withhim; fearing, if he went without some furnishment, and should staylong there for his dinner, he might (perhaps) complaine of hunger:he therefore carried three loaves of bread with him, knowing that hecould meet with water every where, albeit he used to drinke butlittle. having aptly conveyed his bread about him, he went on hisjourny, and arrived at the lord abbots court, an indifferent whilebefore dinner time: wherefore entering into the great hall, and sofrom place to place, beholding the great multitude of tables,bountifull preparation in the kitchin, and what admirable provisionthere was for dinner, he said to himselfe; truly this man is moremagnificent then fame hath made him, because shee speakes toosparingly of him.
while thus he went about, considering on all these things veryrespectively, he saw the maister of the abbots houshold (becausethen it was the houre of dinner) command water to be brought forwashing hands, so everie one sitting down at the tatle, it fell to thelot of primasso, to sit directly against the doore, whereat theabbot must enter into the hall. the custome in this court was such,that no manner of foode should be served to any of the table, untillsuch time as the lord abbot was himselfe set: whereupon, every thingbeing fit and ready, the master of the houshold went to tell his lord,that nothing now wanted but his onely presence.
the abbot comming from his chamber to enter the hall, lookingabout him, as hee was wont to doe; the first man hee saw was primasso,who being but in homely habite, and he having not seene him beforeto his remembrance, a present bad conceite possessed his braine,that he never saw an unworthier person, saying within himselfe: seehow i give my goods away to bee devoured. so returning backe to hischamber againe; commaunded the doore to be made fast, demaunding ofevery man neere about him, if they knew the base knave that satebefore his entrance into the hall, and all his servants answered no.primasso being extreamely hungry, with travailing on foote so farre,and never used to fast so long; expecting still when meate would beserved in, and that the abbot came not at all: drew out one of hisloaves which hee brought with him, and very heartily fell to feeding.
my lord abbot, after hee had stayed within an indifferent while,sent forth one of his men, to see if the poore fellow was gone, or no.the servant told him, that he stayed there, and fed upon dry bread,which it seemed he had brought thither with him. let him feede onhis owne (replyed the abbot) for he shall taste of none of mine thisday. gladly wold the abbot, that primasso should have gone thence ofhimselfe, and yet held it scarsely honest in his lordship, to dismissehim by his owne command. primasso having eaten one of his loaves,and yet the abbot was not come; began to feede upon the second: theabbot still sending to expect his absence, and answered as he wasbefore. at length, the abbot not comming, and primasso having eaten uphis second loafe, hunger compeld him to begin with the third.
when these newes were carried to the abbot, sodainly he brakeforth and saide. what new kinde of needy tricke hath my braine begottethis day? why do i grow disdainfull against any man whatsoever? i havelong time allowed my meate to be eaten by all commers that didplease to visit me, without exception against any person, gentleman,yeoman, poore or rich, marchant or minstrill, honest man or knave,never refraining my presence in the hall, by basely contemning onepoore man. beleeve me, covetousnesse of one mans meate, doth ill agreewith mine estate and calling. what though he appeareth a wretchedfellow to me? he may be of greater merit then i can imagine, anddeserve more honor then i am able to give him.
having thus discoursed with himselfe, he would needs understand ofwhence, and what he was, and finding him to be primasso, come onely tosee the magnificence which he had reported of him, knowing also (bythe generall fame noysed every where of him) that he was reputed to bea learned, honest, and ingenious man: he grew greatly ashamed of hisowne folly, and being desirous to make him an amends, strove manywaies how to do him honor. when dinner was ended, the abbot bestowedhonorable garments on him, such as beseemed his degree and merit,and putting good store of money in his purse, as also giving him agood horse to ride on, left it at his owne free election, whether hewould stay there still with him, or depart at his pleasure.wherewith primasso being highly contented, yeelding him theheartiest thankes he could devise to do, returned to paris onhorse-backe, albeit he came poorely thether on foot.
master can de la scala, who was a man of good understanding,perceived immediately (without any further interpretation) whatbergamino meant by this morall, and smiling on him, saide:bergamino, thou hast honestly expressed thy vertue and necessities,and justly reprooved mine avarice, niggardnesse, and base folly. andtrust me bergamino, i never felt such a fit of covetousnesse come uponme, as this which i have dishonestly declared to thee: and which iwill now banish from me, with the same correction as thou hasttaught mee. so, having payed the host all his charges, redeemingalso his robes or garments, mounting him on a good gelding, andputting plenty of crownes in his purse, he referd it to his ownechoise to depart, or dwell there still with him.
the first day, the eight novell
which plainly declareth, that a covetous gentleman, is not
worthy of any honor or respect
guillaume boursier, with a few quaint and familiar words, checkt themiserable covetousnesse of signior herminio de grimaldi.
madam lauretta, sitting next to philostratus, when she had heard thewitty conceite of bergamino; knowing, that she was to say somewhat,without injunction or command, pleasantly thus began.
this last discourse (faire and vertuous company) induceth me to tellyou, how an honest courtier reprehended in like manner (and nothingunprofitably) base covetousnesse in a merchant of extraordinarywealth. which tale, although (in effect) it may seeme to resemblethe former; yet perhaps, it will prove no lesse pleasing to you, inregard it sorted to as good an end.
it is no long time since, that there lived in genes or geneway, agentleman named signior herminio de grimaldo, who (as every one welknew) was more rich in inheritances, and ready summes of currant moneythen any other knowne citizen in italy. and as hee surpassed other menin wealth, so did he likewise excell them in wretched avarice, beingso miserably greedy and covetous, as no man in the world could be morewicked that way; because, not onely he kept his purse lockt up frompleasuring any, but denied needfull things to himselfe, enduringmany miseries onely to avoid expences, contrary to the genewayesgenerall custom, who alwayes delighted to be decently cloathed, and tohave their dyet of the best. by reason of which most miserablebasenesse, they tooke away from him the sirname of grimaldi, whereofhe was in right descended, and called him master herminio the covetousmizer, a nickname very notably agreeing with his gripple nature.
it came to passe, that in this time of his spending nothing, butmultiplying daily by infinite meanes, that a civill honest gentleman(a courtier of ready wit, and discoursive in languages) came togeneway, being named guillaume boursier. a man very farre differingfrom divers courtiers in these dayes, who for soothing shamefull andgracelesse maners in such as allow them maintenance, are called andreputed to bee gentlemen, yea speciall favourites: whereas much moreworthily, they should be accounted as knaves and villaines, beingborne and bred in all filthinesse, and skilfull in every kinde ofbasest behaviour, not fit to come in princes courts. for, whereas inpassed times, they spent their dayes and paines in making peace,when gentlemen were at warre or dissention, or treating on honestmarriages, betweene friends and familiars, and (with lovingspeeches) would recreate disturbed mindes, desiring none butcommendable exercises in court, and sharpely reprooving (like fathers)disordred life, or ill actions in any, albeit with recompencelittle, or none at all; these upstarts now adayes, employ all theirpaines in detractions, sowing questions and quarrels betweene oneanother, making no spare of lyes and falshoods. nay which is worse,they wil do this in the presence of any man, upbraiding him withinjuries, shames, and scandals (true or not true) upon the veryleast occasion. and by false and deceitful flatteries and villanies oftheir owne inventing, they make gentlemen to become as vile asthemselves. for which detestable qualities, they are better belovedand respected of their misdemeanored lords, and recompenced in morebountifull maner, then men of vertuous carriage and desert. which isan argument sufficient, that goodnesse is gone up to heaven, andhath quite forsaken these loathed lower regions, where men are drownedin the mud of all abhominable vices.
but returning where i left (being led out of my way by a just andreligious anger against such deformity) this gentleman, masterguillaume boursier, was willingly seene, and gladly welcommed by allthe best men in geneway. having remained some few daies in the city,and amongst other matters, heard much talke of the miserablecovetousnesse of master herminio, he grew very desirous to have asight of him. master herminio had already understood, that thisgentleman, master guillaume boursier was vertuously disposed, and (howcovetously soever hee was inclined) having in him some sparkes ofnoble nature, gave him very good words, and gracious entertainment,discoursing with him on divers occasions.
in company of other genewayes with him, he brought him to a newerected house of his, a building of great cost and beauty; where,after he had shewne him all the variable rarieties, he beganne thus.master guillaume, no doubt but you have heard and seene many things,and you can instruct me in some queint conceit or device, to be fairlyfigured in painting, at the entrance into the great hall of myhouse. master guillaume hearing him speake so simply, returned himthis answer: sir, i cannot advise you in any thing, so rare or unseeneas you talk of: but how to sneeze (after a new manner) upon a full andover-cloyed stomacke, to avoyde base humours that stupifie the braine,or other matters of the like quality. but if you would be taught agood one indeede, and had a disposition to see it fairely effected,i could instruct you in an excellent emblem, wherwith (as yet) younever came acquainted.
master herminio hearing him say so, and expecting no such answeras he had, saide, good master guillaume, tell me what it is, and on myfaith i will have it fairely painted. whereto master guillaumesuddenly replied; do nothing but this sir: paint over the portall ofyour halles enterance, the lively picture of liberality, to bid allyour friends better welcome, then hitherto they have beene. whenmaster herminio heard these words, he becam possessed with such asudden shame, that his complexion changed from the former palenesse,and answered thus. master guillaume, i will have your advice sotruly figured over my gate, and shee shall give so good welcome to allmy guests, that both you, and all these gentlemen shall say, i haveboth seene her, and am become reasonably acquainted with her. fromthat time forward, the words of master guillaume were so effectuallwith signior herminio, that he became the most bountifull and besthouse-keeper, which lived in his time in geneway: no man morehonouring and friendly welcoming both strangers and citizens, thenhe continually used to do.
the first day, the ninth novell
giving all men to understand, that justice is necessary
in a king above al things else whatsoever
the king of cyprus was wittily reprehended, by the words of agentlewoman of gascoignie, and became vertuously altered from hisvicious disposition.
the last command of the queene, remained upon madam elissa, oreliza, who (without any delaying) thus beganne. young ladies, ithath often beene seene, that much paine hath beene bestowed, andmany reprehensions spent in vaine, till a word happening at adventure,and perhaps not purposely determined, hath effectually done the deede:as appeareth by the tale of madame lauretta, and another of mine owne,where with i intend briefly to acquaint you, approving that whengood words are discreetly observed, they are of soveraigne power andvertue.
in the dayes of the first king of cyprus, after the conquest made inthe holy land by godfrey of bullen, it fortuned that a gentlewomanof gascoignie, travelling in pilgrimage to visit the sacredsepulcher in jerusalem, returning home againe, arrived at cyprus,where shee was villanously abused by certaine base wretches.complaining thereof, without any comfort or redresse, shee intended tomake her moane to the king of the country. whereupon it was tolde her,that therein shee should but loose her labour, because hee was sowomanish, and faint-hearted; that not onely he refused to punishwith justice the offence of others, but also suffered shamefullinjuries done to himselfe. and therefore, such as were displeased byhis negligence, might easily discharge their spleene against him,and doe him what dishonour they would.
when the gentlewoman heard this, despairing of any consolation, orrevenge for her wrongs, shee resolved to checke the kings deniall ofjustice, and comming before him weeping, spake in this manner. sir,i presume not into your presence, as hoping to have redresse by you,for divers dishonourable injuries done unto me; but, as fullsatisfaction for them, doe but teach me how you suffer such vileabuses, as daily are offered to your selfe. to the end, that beingtherein instructed by you, i may the more patiently beare mine owne;which (as god knoweth) i would bestow on you very gladly, becauseyou know so well how to endure them.
the king, who (till then) had beene very bad, dull, and slothfull,even as sleeping out his time of governement; beganne to revenge thewrongs done to this gentlewoman very severely, and (thence forward)became a most sharpe justicer, for the least offence offered againstthe honour of his crowne, or to any of his subjects beside.
the first day, the tenth novell
wherein is declared, that honest love agreeth with people
of all ages
master albert of bullen, honestly made a lady to blush, that thoughtto have done as much to him, because shee perceived him, to beamorously affected towards her.
after that madam eliza sate silent, the last charge and labour ofthe like employment, remained to the queene her selfe; whereuponshee beganne thus to speake: honest and vertuous young ladies, like asthe starres (when the ayre is faire and cleere) are the adorning andbeauty of heaven, and flowers (while the spring time lasteth) doegraciously embellish the meadowes; even so sweete speeches andpleasing conferences, to passe the time with commendable discourses,are the best habit of the minde, and an outward beauty to the body:which ornaments of words, when they appeare to be short and sweete,are much more seemely in women, then in men; because long andtedious talking (when it may be done in lesser time) is a greaterblemish in women, then in men.
among us women, this day, i thinke few or none have thereinoffended, but as readily have understood short and pithy speeches, asthey have beene quicke and quaintly delivered. but when answeringsuteth not with understanding, it is generally a shame in us, and allsuch as live; because our moderne times have converted that vertue,which was within them who lived before us, into garments of the body,and shew whose habites were noted to bee most gaudy, fullest ofimbroyderies and fantastick fashions: she was reputed to have mostmatter in her, and therefore to be more honoured and esteemed. neverconsidering, that whosoever loadeth the backe of an asse, or puts uponhim the richest braverie; he becommeth not thereby a jot the wiser, ormeriteth any more honor then an asse should have. i am ashamed tospeake it, because in detecting other, i may (perhaps) as justly taxemy selfe.
such imbroydered bodies, tricked and trimmed in such boastingbravery, are they any thing else but as marble statues, dumbe, dull,and utterly insensible? or if (perchaunce) they make an answere,when some question is demanded of them; it were much better for themto be silent. for defence of honest devise and conference among menand women, they would have the world to thinke, that it proceedeth butfrom simplicity and precise opinion, covering their owne folly withthe name of honesty: as if there were no other honest woman, butshee that conferres onely with her chambermaide, laundresse, orkitchin-woman: as if nature had allowed them, (in their owne idleconceite) no other kinde of talking.
most true it is, that as there is a respect to be used in the actionof things; so, time and place are necessarily to be considered, andalso whom we converse withall; because sometimes it happeneth, thata man or woman, intending (by a word of jest and merriment) to makeanother body blush or be ashamed: not knowing what strength of witremaineth in the opposite, doe convert the same disgrace uponthemselves. therefore, that we may the more advisedly stand upon ourowne guard, and to prevent the common proverbe, that women (in allthings) make choyse of the worst: i desire that this dayes lasttale, which is to come from my selfe, may make us all wise. to theend, that as in gentlenesse of minde we conferre with other; so byexcellency in good manners, we may shew our selves not inferiour tothem.
it is not many yeares since (worthy assembly) that in bulloignethere dwelt a learned physitian, a man famous for skill, and farrerenowned, whose name was master albert, and being growne aged, tothe estimate of threescore and tenne yeares: hee had yet such asprightly disposition, that though naturall heate and vigour had quiteshaken hands with him, yet amorous flames and desires had not whollyforsaken him. having seene (at a banquet) a very beautifull woman,being then in the estate of widdowhood, named (as some say) madammargaret de chisolieri, shee appeared so pleasing in his eye; that hissences became no lesse disturbed, then as if he had beene of farreyounger temper, and no night could any quietnesse possesse hissoule, except (the day before) he had seene the sweet countenance ofthis lovely widdow. in regard whereof, his dayly passage was by herdoore, one while on horsebacke, and then againe on foot; as best mightdeclare his plaine purpose to see her.
both shee and other gentlewomen, perceiving the occasion of hispassing and repassing; would privately jest thereat together, to see aman of such yeares and discretion, to be amorously addicted, oroverswayed by effeminate passions. for they were partly perswaded,that such wanton ague fits of love, were fit for none but youthfullapprehensions, as best agreeing with their chearefull complexion.master albert continuing his dayly walkes by the widdowes lodging,it chaunced upon a feastivall day, that shee (accompanied withdivers other women of great account) being sitting at her doore;espied master albert (farre off) comming thitherward, and a resolveddetermination among themselves was set downe, to allow himfavourable entertainement, and to jest (in some merry manner) at hisloving folly, as afterward they did indeede.
no sooner was he come neere, but they all arose, and courteouslyinvited him to enter with them, conducting him into a goodly garden,where readily was prepared choyse of delicate wines and banquetting.at length, among other pleasant and delightfull discourses, theydemanded of him; how it was possible for him, to be amorously affectedtowards so beautifull a woman, both knowing and seeing, howearnestly she was sollicited by many gracious, gallant, andyouthfull spirits, aptly suting with her yeares and desires? masteralbert perceiving, that they had drawne him in among them, onely toscoffe and make a mockery of him; set a merry countenance on thematter, and honestly thus answered.
beleeve mee gentlewoman (speaking to the widdowe her selfe) itshould not appeare strange to any of wisedome and discretion, that iam amorously enclined, and especially to you, because you are wellworthy of it. and although those powers, which naturally appertaine tothe exercises of love, are bereft and gone from aged people; yetgood will thereto cannot be taken from them, neither judgement to knowsuch as deserve to be affected: for, by how much they exceede youth inknowledge and experience, by so much the more hath nature made themmeet for respect and reverence. the hope which incited me (being aged)to love you, that are affected of so many youthfull gallants, grewthus. i have often chaunced into divers places, where i have seeneladies and gentlwomen, being disposed to a collation or rerebanquetafter dinner, to feede on lupines, and young onions or leekes, andalthough it may be so, that there is little or no goodnesse at allin them; yet the heads of them are least hurtfull, and most pleasingin the mouth. and you gentlewomen generally (guided by unreasonableappetite) will hold the heads of them in your hands, and feede uponthe blades or stalkes: which not onely are not good for any thing, butalso are of very bad savour. and what know i (lady) whether amongthe choise of friends, it may fit your fancy to doe the like? for,if you did so, it were no fault of mine to be chosen of you, butthereby were all the rest of your suters the sooner answered.
the widdowed gentlewoman, and all the rest in her company, beingbashfully ashamed of her owne and their folly, presently said.master albert, you have both well and worthily chastised our over-boldpresumption, and beleeve me sir, i repute your love and kindnesse ofno meane merrit, comming from a man so wise and vertuous: andtherefore (mine honour reserved) commaund my uttermost, as alwayesready to do you any honest service. master albert, arising from hisseat, thanking the faire widdow for her gentle offer; tooke leave ofher and all the company, and she blushing, as all the rest weretherein not much behinde her, thinking to checke him, became chiddenher selfe, whereby (if we be wise) let us all take warning.
the sunne was now somewhat farre declined, and the heatesextremity well worne away: when the tales of the seaven ladies andthree gentlemen were thus finished, whereupon their queenepleasantly said. for this day (faire company) there remaineth nothingmore to be done under my regiment, but onely to bestow a new queeneupon you, who (according to her judgement) must take her turne, anddispose what next is to be done, for continuing our time in honestpleasure. and although the day should endure till darke night; inregard, that when some time is taken before, the better preparationmay bee made for occasions to follow, to the end also, that whatsoeverthe new queene shall please to appoint, may be the better fitted forthe morrow: i am of opinion, that at the same houre as we now cease,the following dayes shall severally begin. and therefore, in reverenceto him that giveth life to all things, and in hope of comfort by oursecond day; madam philomena, a most wise young lady, shall governeas queene this our kingdome.
so soone as she had thus spoken, arising from her seate ofdignity, and taking the lawrell crowne from off her owne head; shereverently placed it upon madam philomenaes, shee first of allhumbly saluting her, and then all the rest, openly confessing her tobe their queene, made gracious offer to obey whatsoever she commanded.philomena, her cheekes delivering a scarlet tincture, to see her selfethus honoured as their queene, and well remembring the words, solately uttered by madam pampinea; that dulnesse or neglect might notbe noted in her, tooke cheerefull courage to her, and first of all,she confirmed the officers, which pampinea had appointed the daybefore, then she ordained for the morrowes provision, as also forthe supper so neere approiching, before they departed away fromthence, and then thus began.
lovely companions, although that madam pampinea, more in her ownecourtesie, then any matter of merit remaining in me, hath made me yourqueene: i am not determined, to alter the forme of our intendedlife, nor to be guided by mine owne judgement, but to associate thesame with your assistance. and because you may know what i intend todo, and so (consequently) adde or diminish at your pleasure; in veryfew words, you shall plainly understand my meaning. if you have wellconsidered on the course, which this day hath bene kept by madampampinea, me thinkes it hath bene very pleasing and commendable; inwhich regard, untill by over-tedious continuation, or otheroccasions of irkesome offence, it shall seeme injurious, i am of theminde, not to alter it. holding on the order then as we have begunto doe, we will depart from hence to recreate our selves a while,and when the sun groweth towards setting, we will sup in the fresh andopen ayre; afterward, with canzonets and other pastimes, we willout-weare the houres till bed time. to morrow morning, in the freshand gentle breath thereof, we will rise and walke to such places, asevery one shall finde fittest for them, even as already this day wehave done; untill due time shall summon us hither againe, tocontinue our discoursive tales, wherein (me thinkes) consisteth bothpleasure and profit, especially by discreete observation.
very true it is, that some things which madam pampinea could notaccomplish, by reason of her so small time of authority, i willbegin to undergo, to wit, in restraining some matters whereon we areto speake, that better premeditation may passe upon them. for, whenrespite and a little leysure goeth before them, each discourse willsavour of the more formality; and if it might so please you, thuswould i direct the order. as since the beginning of the world, all menhave bene guided (by fortune) thorow divers accidents and occasions:so beyond all hope and expectation, the issue and successe hath bingood and successful, and accordingly should every one of our argumentsbe chosen.
the ladies, and the yong gentlemen likewise, commended her advice,and promised to imitate it; onely dioneus excepted, who when every onewas silent, spake thus. madam, i say as all the rest have done, thatthe order by you appointed, is most pleasing and worthy to beeallowed. but i intreate one speciall favour for my selfe, and to haveit confirmed to mee, so long as our company continueth; namely, that imay not be constrained to this law of direction, but to tell my taleat liberty, after mine owne minde, and according to the freedome firstinstituted. and because no one shall imagine, that i urge this graceof you, as being unfurnished of discourses in this kinde, i am wellcontented to bee the last in every dayes exercise.
the queene, knowing him to be a man full of mirth and matter,began to consider very advisedly, that he would not have mooved thisrequest, but onely to the end, that if the company grew wearied by anyof the tales re-counted, hee would shut up the dayes disport with somemirthfull accident. wherefore willingly, and with consent of all therest he had his suite granted. so, arising all, they walked to achristall river, descending downe a little hill into a valley,graciously shaded with goodly trees; where washing both their handsand feete, much pretty pleasure passed among them; till supper timedrawing neere, made them returne home to the palace. when supper wasended, and bookes and instruments being laide before them, thequeene commanded a dance, and that madam aemilia, assisted by madamlauretta and dioneus, should sing a sweet ditty. at which command,lauretta undertooke the dance, and led it, aemilia singing this songensuing.
the song
so much delight my beauty yeelds to mee,
that any other love,
to wish or prove;
can never sute it selfe with my desire.
therein i see, upon good observation,
what sweet content due understanding lends:
old or new thoughts cannot in any fashion
rob me of that, which mine owne soule commends.
what object then,
(mongst infinites of men)
can i never finde
to dispossesse my minde,
and plaint therein another new desire?
so much delight, etc.
but were it so, the blisse that i would chuse,
is, by continuall sight to comfort me:
so rare a presence never to refuse,
which mortall tongue or thought, what ere it be
must still conceale,
not able to reveale,
such a sacred sweete,
for none other meete,
but hearts enflamed with the same desire.
so much delight, etc.
the song being ended, the chorus whereof was answered by them all,it passed with generall applause: and after a few other daunces, thenight being well run on, the queene gave ending to this first dayesrecreation. so, lights being brought, they departed to theirseverall lodgings, to take their rest till the next morning.
the induction to the second day
wherein, all the discourses are under the government of
madam philomena: concerning such men or women, as (in divers
accidents) have been much mollested by fortune, and yet afterward
(contrary to their hope and expectation) have had
a happy and successefull deliverance
already had the bright sunne renewed the day every where with hissplendant beames, and the birds sate merrily singing on the bloomingbranches, yeelding testimony thereof to the eares of all hearers; whenthe seven ladies, and the three gentlemen (after they were risen)entered the gardens, and there spent some time in walking, as alsomaking of nose-gayes and chaplets of flowers. and even as they haddone the day before, so did they now follow the same course; for,after they had dined, in a coole and pleasing aire they fell todancing, and then went to sleepe a while, from which being awaked,they tooke their places (according as it pleased the queene toappoint) in the same faire meadow about her. and she, being a goodlycreature, and highly pleasing to behold, having put on her crowne oflawrell, and giving a gracious countenance to the whole company;commanded madam neiphila that her tale should begin this daiesdelight. whereupon she, without returning any excuse or deniall, beganin this manner.
the second day, the first novell
wherein is signified, how easie a thing it is, for wicked men
to deceive the world, under the shadow and colour of miracles:
and that such treachery (oftentimes) redoundeth to
the harme of the deviser
martellino counterfeitting to be lame of his members, causedhimselfe to be set on the body of saint arriguo, where he made shew ofhis sudden recovery; but when his dissimulation was discovered, he waswell beaten, being afterward taken prisoner, and in great danger ofbeing hanged and strangled by the necke, and yet he escaped in theend.
faire ladies, it hath happened many times, that he who striveth toscorne and floute other men, and especially in occasions deservingto be respected, proveth to mocke himselfe with the selfe same matter,yea, and to his no meane danger beside. as you shall perceive by atale, which i intend to tell you, obeying therein the command of ourqueene, and according to the subject by her enjoyned. in whichdiscourse, you may first observe, what great mischance happened to oneour citizens; and yet afterward, how (beyond all hope) he happilyescaped.
not long since, there lived in the city of trevers, an almaine orgermaine, named arriguo, who being a poore man, served as a porter, orburden-bearer for money, when any man pleased to employ him. andyet, notwithstanding his poore and meane condition, he was generallyreputed, to be of good and sanctified life. in which regard (whetherit were true or no, i know not) it happened, that when he died (atleast as the men of trevers themselves affirmed) in the very instanthoure of his departing, all the belles in the great church of trevers,(not being pulled by the helpe of any hand) beganne to ring: whichbeing accounted for a miracle, every one saide; that this arriguohad bene, and was a saint. and presently all the people of the cityran to the house where the dead body lay, and carried it (as asanctified body) into the great church, where people, halt, lame,and blind, or troubled with any other diseases, were brought about it,even as if every one should forth-with be holpen, onely by theirtouching the body.
it came to passe, that in so great a concourse of people, asresorted thither from all parts; three of our citizens went totrevers, one of them being named stechio, the second martellino, andthe third marquiso, all being men of such condition, as frequentedprinces courts, to give them delight by pleasant and counterfettedqualities. none of these men having ever beene at trevers before,seeing how the people crowded thorow the streetes, wondered greatlythereat: but when they knew the reason why the throngs ranne on heapesin such sort together, they grew as desirous to see the shrine, as anyof the rest. having ordered all affaires at their lodging, marquisosaide; it is fit for us to see this saint, but i know not how we shallattaine thereto, because (as i have heard) the place is guarded bygermaine souldiers, and other warlike men, commanded thither by thegovernour of this city, least any outrage should be there committed:and beside, the church is so full of people, as we shall nevercompasse to get neere. martellino being also as forward in desire tosee it, presently replied. all this difficulty cannot dismay me, but iwill go to the very body of the saint it selfe. but how? quothmarquiso. i will tell thee, answered martellino. i purpose to go inthe disguise of an impotent lame person, supported on the one sideby thy selfe, and on the other by stechio, as if i were not able towalke of my selfe: and you two thus sustaining me, desiring to comeneere the saint to cure me; every one will make way, and freely giveyou leave to go on.
this devise was very pleasing to marquiso and stechio, so that(without any further delaying) they all three left their lodging,and resorting into a secret corner aside, martellino so writhed andmishaped his hands, fingers, and armes, his legges, mouth, eyes, andwhole countenance, that it was a dreadfull sight to looke upon him,and whosoever beheld him, would verily have imagined, that hee wasutterly lame of his limbes, and greatly deformed in his body. marquisoand stechio, seeing all sorted so well as they could wish, tooke andled him towards the church, making very pitious moane, and humblydesiring (for gods sake) of every one that they met, to grant themfree passage: whereto they charitably condiscended.
thus leading him on, crying; beware there before, and give way forgods sake, they arrived at the body of saint arriguo, that (by hishelpe) he might be healed. and while all eyes were diligentlyobserving, what miracle would be wrought on martellino, he havingsitten a small space upon the saints body, and being sufficientlyskilfull in counterfeiting, began first to extend forth the one of hisfingers, next his hand, then his arme, and so (by degrees) the rest ofhis body. which when the people saw, they made such a wonderfull noysein praise of saint arriguo, even as if it had thundered in the church.
now it chanced by ill fortune, that there stood a florentine neereto the body, who knew martellino very perfectly; but appearing somonstrously mishapen, when he was brought into the church, hee couldtake no knowledge of him. but when he saw him stand up and walke,hee knew him then to be the man indeede; whereupon he saide. howcommeth it to passe, that this fellow should be so miraculously cured,that never truly was any way impotent? certaine men of the cityhearing these words, entred into further questioning with him,demanding, how he knew that the man had no such imperfection? wellenough (answered the florentine) i know him to be as direct in hislimbes and body, as you; i, or any of us all are: but indeede, heknowes better how to dissemble counterfet trickes, then any man elsethat ever i saw.
when they heard this, they discoursed no further with theflorentine, but pressed on mainely to the place where martellinostood, crying out aloude. lay hold on this traytor, a mocker of god,and his holy saints, that had no lamenesse in his limbes; but tomake a mocke of our saint and us, came hither in false and counterfeitmanner. so laying hands uppon him, they threw him against theground, having him by the haire on his head, and tearing thegarments from his backe, spurning him with their feete, and beatinghim with their fists, that many were much ashamed to see it.
poore martellino was in a pittifull case, crying out for mercy,but no man would heare him; for, the more he cryed, the more stillthey did beat him, as meaning to leave no life in him: which stechioand marquiso seeing, considered with themselves, that they werelikewise in a desperate case; and therefore, fearing to be as muchmisused, they cryed out among the rest, kill the counterfet knave, layon loade, and spare him not; neverthelesse, they tooke care how to gethim out of the peoples handes, as doubting, least they would killhim indeede, by their extreame violence.
sodainly, marquiso bethought him how to do it, and proceeded thus.all the sergeants for justice standing at the church doore, hee ranwith all possible speede to the potestates lieutenant, and said untohim. good my lord justice, helpe me in an hard case; yonder is avillaine that hath cut my purse, i desire he may bee brought beforeyou, that i may have my money againe. he hearing this, sent for adozen of the sergeants, who went to apprehend unhappy martellino,and recover him from the peoples fury, leading him on with them to thepalace, no meane crowds thronging after him, when they heard that hewas accused to bee a cutpurse. now durst they meddle no more with him,but assisted the officers; some of them charging him in like manner,that hee had cut their purses also.
upon these clamours and complaints, the potestates lieutenant (beinga man of rude quality) tooke him sodainly aside, and examined him ofthe crimes wherewith he was charged. but martellino, as making noaccount of these accusations, laughed, and returned scoffing answeres.whereat the judge, waxing much displeased, delivered him over to thestrappado, and stood by himselfe, to have him confesse the crimesimposed on him, and then to hang him afterward. being let downe to theground, the judge still demaunded of him, whether the accusationsagainst him were true, or no? affirming, that it nothing avayled himto deny it: whereupon hee thus spake to the judge. my lord, i am heereready before you, to confesse the truth; but i pray you, demaund ofall them that accuse me, when and where i did cut their purses, andthen i wil tell you that, which (as yet) i have not done, otherwisei purpose to make you no more answers.well (quoth the judge) thou requirest but reason; and callingdivers of the accusers, one of them saide, that he lost his purseeight dayes before; another saide six, another foure, and some saidethe very same day. which martellino hearing, replyed. my lord, theyall lie in their throats, as i will plainly prove before you. iwould to god i had never set foot within this city, as it is notmany houres since my first entrance, and presently after minearrivall, i went (in evill houre i may say for me) to see the saintsbody, where i was thus beaten as you may beholde. that all this istrue which i say unto you, the seigneurie officer that keeps yourbooke of presentations, will testifie for me, as also the host where iam lodged. wherefore good my lord, if you finde all no otherwise, thenas i have said, i humbly entreate you, that upon these bad mensreportes and false informations, i may not be thus tormented, andput in perill of my life.
while matters proceeded in this manner, marquiso and stechio,understanding how roughly the potestates lieutenant dealt withmartellino, and that he had already given him the strappado; were inheavy perplexity, saying to themselves; we have carried this businessevery badly, redeeming him out of the frying-pan, and flinging him intothe fire. whereupon, trudging about from place to place, and meetingat length with their host, they told him truly how all had happened,whereat hee could not refraine from laughing. afterward, he wentwith them to one master alexander agolante, who dwelt in trevers,and was in great credite with the cities cheefe magistrate, to whomhee related the whole discourse; all three earnestly entreating him,to commisserate the case of poore martellino.
master alexander, after he had laughed heartily at this hottepeece of service, went with him to the lord of trevers; prevailingso well with him, that he sent to have martellino brought beforehim. the messengers that went for him, found him standing in his shirtbefore the judge, very shrewdly shaken with the strappado, tremblingand quaking pitifully. for the judge would not heare any thing inhis excuse; but hating him (perhaps) because hee was a florentine:flatly determined to have him hanged by the necke, and would notdeliver him to the lord, untill in meere despight he was compeld to doit.the lord of trevers, when martellino came before him, and hadacquainted him truly with every particular: master alexanderrequested, that he might be dispatched thence for florence, because hethought the halter to be about his necke, and that there was noother helpe but hanging. the lord, smiling (a long while) at theaccident, and causing martellino to be handsomely apparrelled,delivering them also his passe, they escaped out of further danger,and tarried no where, till they came unto florence.
the second day, the second novell
whereby wee may learne, that such things as sometime seeme
hurtfull to us, may turne to our benefit and commodity
rinaldo de este, after hee was robbed by theeves, arrived atchasteau guillaume, where he was friendly lodged by a faire widdow,and recompenced likewise for all his losses; returning afterwardsafe and well home unto his owne house.
much merriment was among the ladies, hearing this tale ofmartellinos misfortunes, so familiarly reported by madam neiphila, andof the men, it was best respected by philostratus, who sitting neerestunto neiphila, the queene commanded his tale to be the next, whenpresently he began to speake thus.
gracious ladies, i am to speake of universall occasions, mingledwith some misfortunes in part, and partly with matters leaning tolove, as many times may happen to such people, that trace thedangerous pathes of amorous desires, or have not learned perfectly, tosay s. julians pater noster, having good beddes of their owne, yetcasually meete with worser lodging.
in the time of azzo, marquesse of ferrara, there was a marchantnamed rinaldo de este, who being one day at bologna, about someespeciall businesse of his owne; his occasions there ended, and ridingfrom thence towards verona, he fell in company with other horsemen,seeming to be merchants like himselfe, but indeede were theeves, menof most badde life and conversation; yet he having no such mistrust ofthem, rode on, conferring with them very familiarly. they perceivinghim to be a merchant, and likely to have some store of money abouthim, concluded betweene themselves to rob him, so soone as theyfound apt place and opportunity. but because he should conceive nosuch suspition, they rode on like modest men, talking honestly andfriendly with him, of good parts and disposition appearing in him,offering him all humble and gracious service, accounting themselveshappy by his companie, as hee returned the same courtesie to them,because hee was alone, and but one servant with him.
falling from one discourse to another, they beganne to talke of suchprayers, as men (in journey) use to salute god withall; and one of thetheeves (they being three in number) spake thus to rinaldo. sir, letit be no offence to you, that i desire to know, what prayer you mostuse when thus you travell on the way? whereto rinaldo replyed inthis manner. to tell you true sir, i am a man grosse enough in suchdivine matters, as medling more with merchandize, then i do withbookes. neverthelesse, at all times when i am thus in journey, inthe morning before i depart my chamber, i say a pater noster, and anave maria for the soules of the father and mother of saint julian; andafter that, i pray god and s. julian to send me a good lodging atnight. and let me tell you sir, that very oftentimes heeretofore, ihave met with many great dangers upon the way, from all which istill escaped, and evermore (when night drew on) i came to anexceeding good lodging. which makes mee firmely beleeve, that saintjulian (in honour of whom i speake it) hath beggd of god such greatgrace for me; and mee thinkes, that if any day i should faile ofthis prayer in the morning: i cannot travaile securely, nor come toa good lodging. no doubt then sir (quoth the other) but you have saidethat prayer this morning? i would be sory else, said rinaldo, suchan especiall matter is not to be neglected.
he and the rest, who had already determined how to handle him beforethey parted, saide within themselves: look thou hast said thypraier, for when we have thy money, saint julian and thou shift forthy lodging. afterward, the same man thus againe conferd with him.as you sir, so i have ridden many journies, and yet i never used anysuch prayer, although i have heard it very much commended, and mylodging hath proved never the worser. perhaps this verie night willtherein resolve us both, whether of us two shall be the best lodged,you that have saide the prayer, or i that never used it at all. buti must not deny, that in sted thereof, i have made use of some verses;as dirupisti, or the intemerata, or de profundis, which are (as mygrandmother hath often told mee) of very great vertue and efficacy.
continuing thus in talke of divers things, winning way, andbeguiling the time, still waiting when their purpose should sort toeffect: it fortuned, that the theeves seeing they were come neere to atowne, called chasteau guillaume, by the foord of a river, the houresomewhat late, the place solitarie, and thickely shaded with trees,they made their assault; and having robd him, left him there on foote,stript into his shirt, saying to him. goe now and see, whether thysaint julian will allow thee this night a good lodging, or no, for ourowne we are sufficiently provided; so passing the river, away theyrode. rinaldoes servant, seeing his master so sharply assayled, like awicked villaine, would not assist him in any sort: but giving hishorse the spurres, never left gallopping, untill hee came tochasteau guillaume, where hee entred upon the point of night,providing himselfe of a lodging, but not caring what became of hismaster.
rinaldo remaining there in his shirt, bare-foot and bare-legged,the weather extremely colde, and snowing incessantly, not knowing whatto doe, darke night drawing on, and looking round about him, forsome place where to abide that night, to the end he might not dye withcolde: he found no helpe at all there for him, in regard that (no longwhile before) the late warre had burnt and wasted all, and not so muchas the least cottage left. compelled by the coldes violence, his teethquaking, and all his body trembling, hee trotted on towardschausteau guillaume, not knowing, whether his man was gone thitheror no, or to what place else: but perswaded himselfe, that if he couldget entrance, there was no feare of finding succour. but before hecame within halfe a mile of the towne, the night grew extreamelydarke, and arriving there so late, hee found the gates fast lockt, andthe bridges drawne up, so that no entrance might be admitted.
grieving greatly heereat, and being much discomforted, rufully heewent spying about the walls, for some place wherein to shrowdhimselfe, at least, to keepe the snow from falling upon him. by goodhap, hee espied an house upon the wall of the towne, which had aterrace jutting out as a penthouse, under which he purposed to standall the night, and then to get him gone in the morning. at length, heefound a doore in the wall, but very fast shut, and some small store ofstrawe lying by it, which he gathered together, and sitting downethereon very pensively; made many sad complaints to saint julian,saying: this was not according to the trust he reposed in her. butsaint julian, taking compassion upon him, without any over-longtarying; provided him of a good lodging, as you shall heare how.
in this towne of chasteau guillaume, lived a young lady, who was awiddow, so beautifull and comely of her person, as sildome was seene amore lovely creature. the marquesse azzo most dearely affected her,and (as his choysest jewell of delight) gave her that house to livein, under the terrace whereof poore rinaldo made his shelter. itchaunced the day before, that the marquesse was come thither,according to his frequent custome, to weare away that night in hercompany, she having secretly prepared a bath for him, and a costlysupper beside. all things being ready, and nothing wanting but themarquesse his presence: suddenly a post brought him such letters,which commanded him instantly to horsebacke, and word hee sent tothe lady, to spare him for that night, because urgent occasions calledhim thence, and hee rode away immediately.
much discontented was the lady at this unexpected accident, andnot knowing now how to spend the time, resolved to use the bathwhich shee had made for the marquesse, and (after supper) betake herselfe to rest, and so she entred into the bath. close to the doorewhere poore rinaldo sate, stoode the bath, by which meanes, shee beingtherein, heard all his quivering moanes, and complaints, seeming to besuch, as the swanne singing before her death: whereupon, shee calledher chamber-maide, saying to her. goe up above, and looke over theterrace on the wall downe to this doore, and see who is there, andwhat he doth. the chamber-maide went up aloft, and by a littleglimmering in the ayre, she saw a man sitting in his shirt, bare onfeete and legges, trembling in manner before rehearsed. shedemanding of whence, and what he was; rinaldoes teeth so trembled inhis head, as very hardly could he forme any words, but (so well ashe could) told her what he was, and how he came thither: mostpittifully entreating her, that if she could affoord him any helpe,not to suffer him to starve there to death with cold.
the chamber-maide, being much moved to compassion, returned to herlady, and tolde her all; she likewise pittying his distresse, andremembring shee had the key of that doore, whereby the marquesseboth entred and returned, when he intended not to be seene of any,said to her maide. goe, and open the doore softly for him; we have agood supper, and none to helpe to eate it, and if he be a manlikely, we can allow him one nights lodging too. the chamber-maide,commending her lady for this charitable kindnesse, opened the doore,and seeing hee appeared as halfe frozen, shee said unto him. make hastgood man, get thee into this bath, which yet is good and warme, for mylady her selfe came but newly out of it. whereto very gladly hecondiscended, as not tarrying to be bidden twise; finding himselfeso singularly comforted with the heate thereof, even as if hee hadbeene restored from death to life. then the lady sent him garments,which lately were her deceased husbands, and fitted him so aptly inall respects, as if purposely they had beene made for him.
attending in further expectation, to know what else the lady wouldcommaund him; hee began to remember god and saint julian, hartilythanking her, for delivering him from so bad a night as wasthreatned towards him, and bringing him to so good entertainment.after all this, the lady causing a faire fire to be made in theneerest chamber beneath, went and sate by it her selfe, demaunding howthe honest man fared. madame, answered the chamber-maide, now that heis in your deceased lords garments, he appeareth to be a very goodlygentleman, and (questionlesse) is of respective birth and breeding,well deserving this gracious favour which you have affoorded him.goe then (quoth the lady) and conduct him hither, to sit by this fire,and sup heere with mee, for i feare he hath had but a sorrie supper.when rinaldo was entred into the chamber, and beheld her to be sucha beautifull lady, accounting his fortune to exceede all comparison,he did her most humble reverence, expressing so much thankefulnesse aspossibly he could, for this her extraordinary grace and favour.
the lady fixing a stedfast eye upon him, well liking his gentlelanguage and behaviour, perceiving also, how fitly her deceasedhusbands apparell was formed to his person, and resembling him inall familiar respects, he appeared (in her judgement) farre beyond thechambermaides commendations of him; so praying him to sit downe by herbefore the fire, she questioned with him, concerning this unhappynights accident befalne him, wherein he fully resolved her, and sheewas the more perswaded, by reason of his servants comming into thetowne before night, assuring him, that he should be found for himearly in the morning.
supper being served in to the table, and hee seated according as thelady commanded; shee began to observe him very considerately; for hewas a goodly man, compleate in all perfection of person, a delicatepleasing countenance, a quicke alluring eye, fixed and constant, notwantonly gadding, in the joviall youthfulnesse of his time, and truesttemper for amorous apprehension; all these were as battering enginesagainst a bulwarke of no strong resistance, and wrought strangely uponher flexible affections. and though shee fed heartily, as occasionconstrained, yet her thoughts had entertained a new kinde of diet,digested onely by the eye; yet so cunningly concealed, that nomotive to immodesty could be discerned. her mercy thus extended to himin misery, drew on (by table discourse) his birth, education, parents,friends, and alies; his wealthy possessions by merchandize, and asound stability in his estate, but above all (and best of all) thesingle and sole condition of a batcheler; an apt and easie steele tostrike fire, especially upon such quicke taking tinder, and in atime favoured by fortune.
no imbarment remained, but remembrance of the marquesse, and thatbeing summoned to her more advised consideration, her youth and beautystood up as conscious accusers, for blemishing her honour and fairerepute, with lewd and luxurious life, far unfit for a lady of herdegree, and well worthy of generall condemnation. what should ifurther say? upon a short conference with her chamber-maide,repentance for sinne past, and solemne promise of a constantconversion, thus shee delivered her minde to rinaldo.
sir, as you have related your fortunes to mee, by this yourcasuall happening hither, if you can like the motion so well as sheethat makes it, my deceased lord and husband living so perfectly inyour person; this house, and all mine is yours; and of a widdow i willbecome your wife, except (unmanly) you deny me. rinaldo hearingthese words, and proceeding from a lady of such absoluteperfections, presuming upon so proud an offer, and condemning himselfeof folly if he should refuse it, thus replied. madam, considering thati stand bound for ever heereafter, to confesse that you are thegracious preserver of my life, and i no way able to returne requitall;if you please so to shadow mine insufficiencie, and to accept me andmy fairest fortunes to doe you service: let me die before a thought ofdeniall, or any way to yeeld you the least discontentment.
heere wanted but a priest to joyne their hands, as mutuall affectionalready had done their hearts, which being sealed with infinit kisses,the chamber-maide called up friar roger her confessor, and wedding andbedding were both effected before the bright morning. in breefe, themarquesse having heard of the marriage, did not mislike it, butconfirmed it by great and honourable giftes; and having sent for hisdishonest servant, he dispatched him (after sound reprehension) toferrara, with letters to rinaldoes father and friends, of all theaccidents that had befalne him. moreover, the very same morning, thethree theeves that had robbed, and so ill intreated rinaldo, foranother facte by them the same night committed, were taken, andbrought to the towne of chasteau guillaume, where they were hanged fortheir offences, and rinaldo with his wife rode to ferrara.
the second day, the third novell
wherein is declared the dangers of prodigalitie, and
the manifold mutabilities of fortune
three young gentlemen, being brethren, and having spent all theirlands and possessions vainely, became poore. a nephew of theirs(falling almost into as desperate a condition) became acquaintedwith an abbot, whom he afterward found to be the king of englandsdaughter, and made him her husband in mariage, recompencing all hisuncles losses, and seating them againe in good estate.
the fortunes of rinaldo de este, being heard by the ladies andgentlemen, they admired his happinesse, and commended his devotionto saint julian, who (in such extreame necessity) sent him so goodsuccour. nor was the lady to be blamed, for leaving base liberty,and converting to the chaste embraces of the marriage bed, the dignityof womens honour, and eternall disgrace living otherwise. while thusthey descanted on the happy night betweene her and rinaldo, madampampinea sitting next to philostratus, considering, that her discoursemust follow in order, and thinking on what shee was to say; the queenehad no sooner sent out her command, but she being no lesse fairethen forward, began in this manner. ladies of great respect, themore we conferre on the accidents of fortune, so much the moreremaineth to consider on her mutabilities, wherein there is no need ofwonder, if discreetly we observe that al such things as we fondlytearme to be our owne, are in her power, and so (consequently)change from one to another, without any stay or arrest (according toher concealed judgement) or setled order (at least) that can beeknowne to us. now, although these things appeare thus dayly to us,even apparantly in all occasions, and as hath beene discerned bysome of our precedent discourses; yet notwithstanding, seeing itpleaseth the queene, that our arguments should aime at these ends, iwill adde to the former tales another of my owne, perhaps notunprofitable for the hearers, nor unpleasing in observation.
sometime heeretofore, there dwelt in our cittie, a knight namedsignior theobaldo, who (according as some report) issued from thefamily of lamberti, but others derive him of the agolanti; guiding(perhaps) their opinion heerein, more from the traine of children,belonging to the saide theobaldo (evermore equall to that of theagolanti) then any other matter else. but setting aside from whichof these two houses he came, i say, that in his time he was a verywealthy knight, and had three sonnes; the first being namedlamberto, the second theobaldo, and the third agolanto, all goodly andgracefull youths: howbeit, the eldest had not compleated eighteeneyeares, when signior theobaldo the father deceased, who left themall his goods and inheritances. and they, seeing themselves rich inready monies and revennewes, without any other governement thentheir owne voluntary disposition, kept no restraint upon theirexpences, but maintained many servants, and store of unvalewablehorses, beside hawkes and hounds, with open house for all commers; andnot onely all delights else fit for gentlemen, but what vanitiesbeside best agreed with their wanton and youthfull appetites.
not long had they run on this race, but the treasures lefte themby their father, began greatly to diminish; and their revennewessuffised not, to support such lavish expences as they had begun: butthey fell to engaging and pawning their inheritances, selling one today, and another to morrow, so that they saw themselves quickelycome to nothing, and then poverty opened their eyes, which prodigalityhad before clozed up. heereupon, lamberto (on a day) calling hisbrethren to him, shewed them what the honors of their father hadbeene, to what height his wealth amounted, and now to what an ebbeof poverty it was falne, only thorow their inordinate expences.wherefore hee counselled them, (as best he could) before furthermisery insulted over them, to make sale of the small remainder thatwas left, and then to betake themselves unto some other abiding, wherefairer fortune might chance to shine uppon them.
this advice prevailed with them; and so, without taking leave of anybody, or other solemnity then closest secrecie, they departed fromflorence, not tarrying in any place untill they were arrived inengland. comming to the city of london, and taking there a small houseupon yearely rent, living on so little charge as possibly might be,they began to lend out money at use: wherein fortune was so favourableto them, that (in few yeares) they had gathered a great summe of mony:by means whereof it came to passe, that one while one of them, andafterward another, returned backe againe to florence: where, withthose summes, a great part of their inheritances were redeemed, andmany other bought beside. linking themselves in marriage, and yetcontinuing their usances in england; they sent a nephew of theirsthither, named alessandro, a yong man, and of faire demeanor, tomaintaine their stocke in employment: while they three remained stilin florence, and growing forgetful of their former misery, fell againeinto as unreasonable expences as ever, never respecting their housholdcharges, because they had good credite among the merchants, and themonies still sent from alessandro, supporting their expences diversyeeres.
the dealings of alessandro in england grew verie great, for hee lentout much money to many gentlemen, lords, and barons of the land,upon engagement of their mannors; castles, and other revennues: fromwhence he derived immeasurable benefite. while the three brethren heldon in their lavish expences, borrowing moneys when they wanteduntill their supplies came from england, whereon (indeede) was theyronely dependance: it fortuned, that (contrary to the opinion of allmen) warre happened betweene the king of england, and one of hissonnes, which occasioned much trouble in the whole countrey, by takingpart on either side, some with the sonne, and other with the father.in regard whereof, those castles and places pawned to alessandro, weresodainely seized from him, nothing then remaining, that turned him anyprofite. but living in hope day by day, that peace would beconcluded betweene the father and the sonne, he never doubted, but allthings then should be restored to him, both the principall andinterest, and therfore he would not depart out of the countrey.
the three brethren at florence, bounding within no limites theirdisordered spending; borrowed dayly more and more. and after somefew yeares, the creditors seeing no effect of their hopes to come fromthem, all credit being lost with them, and no repayment of promiseddues, they were imprisoned, their landes and all they had, notsuffising to pay the moitie of debts, but their bodies remained inprison for the rest, theyr wives and young children being sent thence,some to one village, some to another, so that nothing now was to beexpected, but poverty and misery of life for ever. as for honestalessandro, who had awaited long time for peace in england, perceyvingthere was no likelyhoode of it; and considering also, that (beside histarrying there in vaine to recover his dues) he was in danger of hislife; without any further deferring, he set away for italy. it came topasse, that as he yssued foorth of bruges, hee saw a young abbotalso journeying thence, being cloathed in white, accompanied withdivers monkes, and a great traine before, conducting the needfullcarriage. two auncient knights, kinsmen to the king, followed after;with whom alessandro acquainted himselfe, as having formerly knownthem, and was kindely accepted into their company. alessandro ridingalong with them, courteously requested to know, what those monkswere that rode before, and such a traine attending on them? wheretoone of the knights thus answered.
he that rideth before, is a yong gentleman, and our kinsman, whois newly elected abbot of one of the best abbeys in england, andbecause he is more yong in yeeres, then the decrees for such a dignitydo allow, we travaile with him to rome, to entreat our holy father,that his.youth may be dispensed withall, and he confirmed in thesaid dignitie; but hee is not to speake a word to any person. onrode this new abbot, sometimes before his traine, and other whilesafter, as we see great lords use to do, when they ride upon thehigh-wayes.
it chanced on a day, that alessandro rode somewhat neere to theabbot, who stedfastly beholding him, perceived that he was a verycomely young man, so affable, lovely, and gracious, that even inthis first encounter, he had never seene any man before that betterpleased him. calling him a little closer, he began to conferrefamiliarly with him, demanding what he was, whence he came, andwhether he travelled. alessandro imparted freely to him all hisaffaires, in every thing satisfying his demands, and offering(although his power was small) to doe him all the service he could.
when the abbot had heard his gentle answeres, so wisely anddiscreetly delivered, considering also (more particularly) hiscommendable carriage, hee tooke him to be (at the least) awell-borne gentleman, and far differing from his owne logger headedtraine. wherefore, taking compassion on his great misfortunes, hecomforted him very kindly, wishing him to live alwayes in good hope.for, if he were vertuous and honest, he should surely attaine to theseate from whence fortune had throwne him, or rather much higher.intreating him also, that seeing he journied towards tuscany, as hehimselfe did the like, to continue stil (if he pleased) in hiscompany. alessandro most humbly thanked him for such gracious comfort;protesting, that he would be alwaies readie to do whatsoever hecommanded.
the abbot riding on, with newer crotchets in his braine then hehad before the sight of alessandro, it fortuned, that after diversdayes of travaile, they came to a small country village, whichaffoorded little store of lodging, and yet the abbot would needeslye there. alessandro, being well acquainted with the hoste of thehouse, willed him to provide for the abbot and his people, and then tolodge him where hee thought it meetest. now before the abbotscomming thither, the harbenger that marshalled all such matters, hadprovided for his traine in the village, some in one place, andothers elsewhere, in the best maner that the towne could yeelde. butwhen the abbot had supt, a great part of the night being spent, andevery one else at his rest; alessandro demaunded of the hoste, whatprovision he had made for him, and how hee should be lodged thatnight?
in good sadnesse sir (quoth the host) you see that my house isfull of guests, so that i and my people, must gladly sleepe on thetables and benches: neverthelesse, next adjoyning to my lord abbotschamber, there are certaine corn-lofts, whether i can closely bringyou, and making shift there with a slender pallet-bed, it may servefor one night, insted of a better. but mine host (quoth alessandro)how can i passe thorow my lords chamber, which is so little, as itwould not allow lodging for any of his monkes? if i had remembred somuch (said the host) before the curtaines were drawne, i could havelodged his monkes in the corne-lofts, and then both you and i mighthave slept where now they doe. but feare you not, my lords curtainesare close drawne, hee sleepeth (no doubt) soundly, and i canconveigh you thither quietly enough, without the least disturbanceto him, and a pallet-bed shall be fitted there for you. alessandroperceiving that all this might be easily done, and no diseaseoffered to the abbot, accepted it willingly, and went thitherwithout any noyse at all.
my lord abbot, whose thoughts were so busied about amorousdesires, that no sleepe at all could enter his eyes, heard all thistalke between the host and alessandro, and also where hee wasappointed to lodge, he saide thus within himselfe. seeing fortune hathfitted me with a propitious time, to compasse the happinesse of myhearts desire; i know no reason why i should refuse it. perhaps, ishall never have the like offer againe, or ever be enabled with suchan opportunitie. so, beeing fully determined to prosecute hisintention, and perswading himself also, that the silence of thenight had bestowed sleepe on all the rest; with a lowe and tremblingvoyce, he called alessandro, advising him to come and lye downe byhim, which (after some few faint excuses) he did, and putting offhis cloaths, lay downe by the abbot, being not a little proude of sogracious a favour.
the abbot, laying his arme over the others body, began to imbraceand hugge him; even as amorous friends (provoked by earnestaffection), use to doe. whereat alessandro verie much mervayling,and being an italian himselfe, fearing least this folly in theabbot, would convert to foule and dishonest action, shrunke modestlyfrom him. which the abbot perceiving, and doubting least alessandrowould depart and leave him, pleasantly smiling, and with bashfullbehaviour baring his stomack, he tooke alessandroes hand, and layingit thereon, saide; alessandro, let all bad thoughts of bestiallabuse be farre off from thee, and feele here, to resolve thee from allsuch feare. allessandro feeling the abbots brest, found there twopretty little mountaines, round, plumpe, and smooth, appearing as ifthey had beene of polished ivory; whereby he perceived, that the abbotwas a woman: which, setting an edge on his youthful desires, madehim fall to embracing, and immediately he offered to kisse her; butshe somewhat rudely repulsing him, as halfe offended, saide.
alessandro, forbeare such boldnesse, uppon thy lives perill, andbefore thou further presume to touch me, understand what i shalltell thee. i am (as thou perceivest) no man, but a woman; anddeparting a virgin from my fathers house, am travelling towards thepopes holinesse, to the end that he should bestow me in marriage.but the other day, when first i beheld thee, whether it proceeded fromthy happinesse in fortune, or the fatall houre of my owne infelicityfor ever, i know not; i conceyved such an effectuall kinde of likingtowardes thee, as never did woman love a man more truely then i doethee having sworn within my soule to make thee my husband before anyother; and if thou wilt not accept me as thy wife, set a locke uponthy lippes concerning what thou hast heard, and depart hence tothine owne bed againe.
no doubt, but that these were strange newes to alessandro, andseemed meerely as a miracle to him. what shee was, he knew not, but inregard of her traine and company, hee reputed her to be both noble andrich, as also she was wonderfull faire and beautifull. his ownefortunes stood out of future expectation by his kinsmens overthrow,and his great losses in england; wherefore, upon an opportunity sofairely offered, he held it no wisedome to returne refusall, butaccepted her gracious motion, and referred all to her disposing.shee arising out of her bed, called him to a little table standing by,where hung a faire crucifixe upon the wall; before which, andcalling him to witnesse, that suffered such bitter and cruell tormentson his crosse, putting a ring upon his finger, there she faithfullyespoused him, refusing all the world, to be onely his: which beingon either side confirmed solemnly, by an holy vow, and chastekisses; shee commanded him backe to his chamber, and she returned toher bed againe, sufficiently satisfied with her loves acceptation, andso they journied on till they came to rome.
when they had rested themselves there for some few dayes, thesupposed abbot, with the two knights, and none else in company butalessandro, went before the pope, and having done him such reverenceas beseemed, the abbot began to speake in this manner.
holy father (as you know much better then any other) everie one thatdesireth to live well and vertuously, ought to shunne (so farre asin them lyeth) all occasions that may induce to the contrarie. tothe end therefore, that i (who desire nothing more) then to livewithin the compasse of a vertuous conversation, may perfect my hopesin this behalfe: i have fled from my fathers court, and am come hitherin this habite as you see, to crave therein your holy and fatherlyfurtherance. i am daughter to the king of england, and havesufficiently furnished my selfe with some of his treasures, thatyour holinesse may bestow me in marriage; because mine unkindfather, never regarding my youth and beauty (inferior to few in mynative country) would marry me to the king of north-wales, an aged,impotent, and sickely man. yet let me tell your sanctity, that his ageand weakenesse hath not so much occasioned my right, as feare ofmine owne youth and frailety; when being married to him, instead ofloyall and unstained life, lewd and dishonest desires might make me towander, by breaking the divine lawes of wedlocke, and abusing theroyall blood of my father.
as i travailed hither with this vertuous intention, our lord, whoonely knoweth perfectly, what is best fitting for all his creatures;presented mine eyes (no doubt in his meere mercy and goodnesse) with aman meete to be my husband, which (pointing to alessandro) is thisyoung gentleman standing by me, whose honest, vertuous, and civilldemeanour, deserveth a lady of farre greater worth, although (perhaps)nobility in blood be denied him, and may make him seeme not soexcellent, as one derived from royall discent. holy and religiousvowes have past betweene us both, and the ring on his finger, is thefirme pledge of my faith and constancie, never to accept any other manin marriage, but him onely, although my father, or any else doedislike it. wherefore (holy father) the principall cause of my comminghither, being already effectually concluded on, i desire to compleatthe rest of my pilgrimage, by visiting the sanctified places in thiscity, whereof there are great plenty: and also, that sacredmarriage, being contracted in the presence of god onely, betweenealessandro and my selfe, may by you be publikely confirmed, and inan open congregation. for, seeing god hath so appointed it, and oursoules have so solemnely vowed it, that no disaster whatsoever canalter it: you being gods vicar here on earth, i hope will notgainesay, but confirme it with your fatherly benediction, that wee maylive in gods feare, and dye in his favour.
perswade your selves (faire ladies) that alessandro was in nomeane admiration, when hee heard, that his wife was daughter to theking of england, unspeakable joy (questionlesse) wholly overcamehim: but the two knights were not a little troubled and offended, atsuch a straunge and unexpected accident, yea, so violent were theirpassions, that had they beene any where else, then in the popespresence, alessandro had felt their furie, and (perhaps) the princesseher selfe too. on the other side, the pope was much amazed at thehabite she went disguised in, and likewise at the election of herhusband; but, perceiving there was no resistance to be made againstit, hee yeelded the more willingly to satisfie her desire. andtherefore, having first comforted the two knights, and made peacebetweene them, the princesse, and alessandro, he gave order for therest that was to be done.
when the appointed day for the solemnity was come, hee caused theprincesse (cloathed in most rich and royall garments) to appearebefore all the cardinals, and many other great persons then inpresence, who were come to this worthy feast, which hee had causedpurposely to bee prepared, where she seemed so faire and goodly alady, that every eye was highly delighted to behold her, commendingher with no meane admiration. in like manner was alessandro greatlyhonoured by the two knights, being most sumptuous in appearance, andnot like a man that had lent money to usury, but rather of very royallquality; the pope himselfe celebrating the marriage betweene them,which being finished, with the most magnificent pompe that could bedevised, hee gave them his benediction, and licenced their departurethence.
alessandro, his princesse and her traine thus leaving rome, theywould needes visite florence, where the newes of this accident was(long before) noysed, and they received by the citizens in royallmanner. there did shee deliver the three brethren out of prison,having first payed all their debts, and reseated them againe (withtheir wives) in their former inheritances and possessions.afterward, departing from florence, and agolanto, one of the unclestravailing with them to paris; they were there also most honourablyentertained by the king of france. from whence the two knights wentbefore for england, and prevailed so successefully with the king; thathee received his daughter into grace and favour, as also his sonnein law her husband, to whom hee gave the order of knighthoode, and(for his greater dignitie) created him earle of cornewall.
and such was the noble spirit of alessandro, that he pacified thetroubles betweene the king and his sonne, whereon ensued great comfortto the kingdome, winning the love and favour of all the people; andagolanto (by the meanes of alessandro) recovered all that was due tohim and his brethren in england, returning richly home to florence,count alessandro (his kinsman) having first dub'd him knight. longtime he lived in peace and tranquility, with the faire princesse hiswife, proving to be so absolute in wisedome, and so famous a souldier;that (as some report) by assistance of his father in law, he conqueredthe realme of ireland, and was crowned king thereof.
the second day, the fourth novell
whereby may be discerned, into how many dangers a man may
fall, through a covetous desire to enrich himselfe
landolpho ruffolo, falling into poverty, became a pirate on theseas, and being taken by the genewayes, hardly escaped drowning: whichyet (neverthelesse) he did, upon a little chest or coffer, full ofvery rich jewels, being carried thereon to corfu, where he was wellentertained by a good woman; and afterward, returned richly home tohis owne house.
madam lauretta, sitting next to madam pampinea, and seeing howtriumphantly she had finished her discourse; without attending anything else, spake thus. gracious ladies, we shall never behold (inmine opinion) a greater act of fortune, then to see a man so suddainlyexalted, even from the lowest depth of poverty, to a royall estateof dignity; as the discourse of madam pampinea hath made good, bythe happy advancement of alessandro. and because it appearethnecessary, that whosoever discourseth on the subject proposed,should no way vary from the very same termes; i shall not shame totell a tale, which, though it containe far greater mishapes then theformer, may sort to as happy an issue, albeit not so noble andmagnificent. in which respect, it may (perhaps) merit the lesseattention; but howsoever that fault shall be found in you, i meaneto discharge mine owne duty.
opinion hath made it famous for long time, that the seacoast ofrhegium to gaieta, is the onely delactable part of all italy, wherein,somewhat neere to salerno, is a shore looking upon the sea, whichthe inhabitants there dwelling, doe call the coast of malfy, full ofsmall townes, gardens, springs, and wealthy men, trading in as manykindes of merchandizes, as any other people that i know. among whichtownes, there is one, named ravello, wherein (as yet to this day thereare rich people) there was (not long since) a very wealthy man,named landolpho ruffolo, who being not contented with his riches,but coveting to multiply them double and trebble, fell in danger, toloose both himselfe and wealth together. this man (as othermerchants are wont to doe) after hee had considered on his affaires,bought him a very goodly ship, lading it with divers sorts ofmerchandizes, all belonging to himselfe onely, and making his voyageto the isle of cyprus. where he found, over and beside themerchandizes he had brought thither, many ships more there arrived,and all laden with the same commodities, in regard whereof, it wasneedefull for him, not onely to make a good mart of his goods; butalso was further constrained (if hee meant to vent his commodities) tosell them away (almost) for nothing, endangering his utter destructionand overthrow. whereupon, grieving exceedingly at so great a losse,not knowing what to doe, and seeing, that from very aboundantwealth, hee was likely to fall into as low poverty: he resolved todie, or to recompence his losses upon others, because he would notreturne home poore, having departed thence so rich.
meeting with a merchant, that bought his great ship of him; with themoney made thereof, and also his other merchandizes, hee purchasedanother, being a lighter vessell, apt and proper for the use of apirate, arming and furnishing it in ample manner, for roving androbbing upon the seas. thus hee began to make other mens goods hisowne, especially from the turkes he tooke much wealth, fortune beingalwayes therein so favourable to him, that hee could never compassethe like by trading. so that, within the space of one yeare, hee hadrobd and taken so many gallies from the turke; that he foundhimselfe well recovered, not onely of all his losses by merchandize,but likewise his wealth was wholly redoubled. finding his losses to bevery liberally requited, and having now sufficient, it were folly tohazard a second fall; wherefore, conferring with his owne thoughts,and finding that he had enough, and needed not to covet after more: hefully concluded, now to returne home to his owne house againe, andlive upon his goods thus gotten.
continuing still in feare of the losses he had sustained bytraffique, and minding never more to imploy his money that way, but tokeep this light vessell, which had holpen him to all his wealth: hecommanded his men to put forth their oares, and shape,their course forhis owne dwelling. being aloft in the higher seas, darke nightover-taking them, and a mighty winde suddainly comming upon them: itnot onely was contrary to their course, but held on with suchimpetuous violence; that the small vessell, being unable to endure it,made to land-ward speedily, and in expectation of a more friendlywind, entred a little port of the sea, directing up into a smallisland, and there safely sheltred it selfe. into the same port whichlandolpho had thus taken for his refuge, entred (soone after) twogreat carrackes of genewayes, lately come from constantinople. whenthe men in them had espied the small barke, and lockt up her passagefrom getting forth; understanding the owners name, and that report hadfamed him to be very rich, they determined (as men evermore addictednaturally, to covet after money and spoile) to make it their owne as aprize at sea.
landing some store of their men, well armed with crossebowes andother weapons, they tooke possession of such a place, where none durstissue forth of the small barke, but endangered his life with theirdarts and arrowes. entering aboord the barke, and making it their owneby full possession, all the men they threw over-boord, without sparingany but landolpho himselfe, whom they mounted into one of thecarrackes, leaving him nothing but a poore shirt of maile on hisbacke, and having rifled the barke of all her riches, sunke it intothe bottome of the sea. the day following, the rough windes beingcalmed, the carrackes set saile againe, having a prosperous passageall the day long; but upon the entrance of darke night, the windesblew more tempestuously then before, and sweld the sea in such rudestormes, that the two carracks were sundered each from other, and byviolence of the tempest it came to passe, that the carracke whereinlay poore miserable landolpho (beneath the isle of cephalonia) ranagainst a rocke, and even as a glasse against a wall, so split thecarracke in peeces, the goods and merchandize floating on the sea,chests, coffers, beds, and such like other things, as often hapneth insuch lamentable accidents.
now, notwithstanding the nights obscurity, and impetuous violence ofthe billowes; such as could swimme, made shift to save their livesby swimming. others caught hold on such things, as by fortunes favour,floated neerest to them, among whom, distressed landolpho, desirous tosave his life, if possibly it might be, espied a chest or cofferbefore him, ordained (no doubt) to be the meanes of his safety fromdrowning. now although the day before, he had wished for deathinfinite times, rather then to returne home in such wretchedpoverty; yet, seeing how other men strove for safety of their lives byany helpe, were it never so little, bee tooke advantage of this favouroffred him, and the rather in a necessitie so urgent. keeping fastupon the coffer so well as he could, and being driven by the winds andwaves, one while this way, and anon quite contrary, he made shiftfor himselfe till day appeared; when looking every way about him,seeing nothing but clouds, the seas and the coffer, which one whileshrunke from under him, and another while supported him, accordingas the windes and billowes carried it: all that day and night thushe floated up and downe, drinking more then willingly hee would, butalmost hunger-starved thorow want of foode. the next morning, eitherby the appointment of heaven or power of the windes, landolpho who was(well-neere) become a spundge, holding his armes strongly about thechest, as we have seene some doe, who (dreading drowning) take hold onany the very smallest helpe; drew neere unto the shore of the ilandcorfu, where (by good fortune) a poore woman was scowring disheswith the salt water and sand, to make them (housewife like) neateand cleane.
when shee saw the chest drawing neere her, and not discerning theshape of any man, shee grew fearefull, and retyring from it, cried outaloude. he had no power of speaking to her, neither did his sightdoe him the smallest service; but even as the waves and windespleased, the chest was driven still neerer to the land, and then thewoman perceyved that it had the forme of a ofer, and looking moreadvisedly, beheld two armes extended over it, and afterward, sheespied the face of a man, not being able to judge, whether he werealive, or no. moved by charitable and womanly compassion, shee steptin among the billowes, and getting fast holde on the hayre of hishead, drew both the chest and him to the land, and calling forth herdaughters to helpe her, with much adoe she unfolded his armes from thechest, setting it up on her daughters head, and then betweene them,landolpho was led into the towne, and there conveyed into a warmestove, where quickly he recovered by her pains, his strengthbenummed with extreame cold.
good wines and comfortable broathes shee cherished him withall, thathis sences being indifferently restored, hee knew the place wherehee was; but not in what manner he was brought thither, till thegood woman shewed him the cofer that had kept him floating upon thewaves, and (next under god) had saved his life. the chest seemed ofsuch slender weight, that nothing of any value could be expected init, either to recompence the womans great paines and kindnessebestowne on him, or any matter of his owne benefit. neverthelesse, thewoman being absent, he opened the chest, and found innumerableprecious stones therein, some costly and curiously set in gold, andothers not fixed in any mettall. having knowledge of their great worthand value (being a merchant, and skil'd in such matters) he becamemuch comforted, praysing god for this good successe, and such anadmirable meanes of deliverance from danger.
then considering with himselfe, that (in a short time) hee had beenetwice well buffeted and beaten by fortune, and fearing, least athird mishap might follow in like manner, hee consulted with histhoughts, how he might safest order the businesse, and bring so rich abooty (without perill) to his owne home. wherefore, wrapping up thejewels in very unsightly coloures, that no suspition at all shouldbe conceived of them, hee saide to the good woman, that the chestwould not doe him any further service; but if shee pleased to lendehim a small sacke or bagge, shee might keepe the cofer, for in herhouse it would divers way stead her. the woman gladly did as hedesired, and landolpho returning her infinite thankes, for theloving kindnesse shee had affoorded him, throwing the sacke on hisnecke, passed by a barke to brundusiam, and from thence to tranium,where merchants in the city bestowed good garments on him, heacquainting them with his disasterous fortunes, but not a wordconcerning his last good successe.
being come home in safety to ravello, he fell on his knees, andthanked god for all his mercies towards him. then opening the sacke,and viewing the jewels at more leysure then formerly he had done, hefound them to be of so great estimation, that selling them but atordinary and reasonable rates, he was three times richer, then whenhee departed first from his house. and having vented them all, he senta great summe of money to the good woman at corfu, that had rescuedhim out of the sea, and saved his life in a danger so dreadfull. thelike he did to tranium, to the merchants that had newly cloathedhim; living richly upon the remainder, and never adventuring more tothe sea, but ended his dayes in wealth and honour.
the second day, the fift novell
comprehending, how needfull a thing it is, for a man that
travelleth in affaires of the world, to be provident and
well advised, and carefully to keepe himselfe from the
crafty and deceitfull allurements of strumpets
andrea de piero, travelling from perouse to naples to buy horses,was (in the space of one night) surprised by three admirableaccidents, out of all which he fortunately escaped, and with a richring, returned home to his owne house.
the precious stones and jewels found by landolpho, maketh mee toremember (said madam fiammetta, who was next to deliver her discourse)a tale, containing no lesse perils, then that reported by madamlauretta: but somewhat different from it, because the one happenedin sundry yeeres, and this other had no longer time, then the compasseof one poore night, as instantly i will relate unto you.
as i have heard reported by many, there sometime lived in perouse orperugia, a young man, named andrea de piero, whose profession was totrade about horses, in the nature of a horse-courser, orhorsemaster, who hearing of a good faire or market (for his purpose)at naples, did put five hundred crownes of gold in his purse, andjourneyed thither in the company of other horse-coursers, arrivingthere on a sunday in the evening. according to instructions givenhim by his host, he went the next day into the horse-market, wherehe saw very many horses that he liked, cheapening their prices as hewent up and downe, but could fall to no agreement; yet to manifestthat he came purposely to buy, and not as a cheapener onely,oftentimes (like a shallow-brainde trader in the world) he shewedhis purse of gold before all passengers, never respecting who, or whatthey were that observed his follie.
it came to passe, that a young sicillian wench (very beautifull, butat commaund of whosoever would, and for small hire) pass then by,and (without his percieving) seeing such store of gold in his purse;presently she said to her selfe: why should not all those crownes bemine, when the foole that owes them, can keepe them no closer? andso she went on. with this young wanton there was (at the same time) anolde woman (as commonly such stuffe is alwayes so attended) seeming tobe a sicillian also, who so soone as shee saw andrea, knew him, andleaving her youthfull commodity, ranne to him, and embraced him verykindly. which when the younger lasse perceived, without proceeding anyfurther, she stayed to see what would ensue thereon. andrea conferringwith the olde bawde, and knowing her (but not for any such creature)declared himselfe very affable to her; she making him promise, thatshee would come and drinke with him at his lodging. so breaking offfurther speeches for that time, shee returned to her youngcammerado; and andrea went about buying his horses, still cheapninggood store, but did not buy any all that morning.
the punke that had taken notice of andreas purse, upon the oldewomans comming backe to her (having formerly studied, how shee mightget all the gold, or the greater part thereof) cunningly questionedwith her, what the man was, whence hee came, and the occasion of hisbusinesse there? wherein she fully informed her particularly, and inas ample manner as himselfe could have done: that shee had long timedwelt in sicily with his father, and afterward at perouse;recounting also, at what time she came thence, and the cause which nowhad drawne him to naples. the witty young housewife, being thorowlyinstructed, concerning the parents and kindred of andrea, their names,quality, and all other circumstances thereto leading; began to framethe foundation of her purpose thereupon, setting her resolutiondowne constantly, that the purse and gold was (already) more thanhalfe her owne.
being come home to her owne house, away shee sent the olde pandresseabout other businesse, which might hold her time long enough ofemployment, and hinder her returning to andrea according to promise,purposing, not to trust her in this serious piece of service.calling a young crafty girle to her, whom she had well tutoured in thelike ambassages, when evening drew on, she sent her to andreaslodging, where (by good fortune) she found him sitting alone at thedoore, and demanding of him, if he knew an honest gentleman lodgingthere, whose name was signior andrea de piero; he made her answere,that himselfe was the man. then taking him aside, she said. sir, thereis a worthy gentlewoman of this citie, that would gladly speake withyou, if you pleased to vouchsafe her so much favour.
andrea, hearing such a kinde of salutation, and from agentlewoman, named of worth; began to grow proud in his owneimaginations, and to make no meane estimation of himselfe: as(undoubtedly) that he was an hansome proper man, and of such cariageand perfections, as had attracted the amorous eye of this gentlewoman,and induced her to like and love him beyond all other, naples notcontaining a man of better merit. whereupon he answered the mayde,that he was ready to attend her mistresse, desiring to know, when itshould be, and where the gentlewoman would speake with him? so sooneas you please sir, replied the damosell, for she tarrieth your commingin her owne house.
instantly andrea (without leaving any direction of his departurein his lodging, or when he intended to returne againe) said to thegirle: goe before, and i will follow. this little chamber-commodity,conducted him to her mistresses dwelling, which was in a streete namedmalpertuis, a title manifesting sufficiently the streetes honesty: buthee, having no such knowledge thereof, neither suspecting any harme atall, but that he went to a most honest house, and to a gentlewomanof good respect; entred boldly: the mayde going in before, and guidinghim up a faire payre of stayres, which he having more then halfeascended, the cunning young queane gave a call to her mistresse,saying; signior andrea is come already, whereupon, she appeared at thestayres-head, as if she had stayed there purposely to entertainehim. she was young, very beautifull, comely of person, and rich inadornements, which andrea well observing, and seeing her descend twoor three steps, with open armes to embrace him, catching fast holdabout his neck; he stood as a man confounded with admiration, andshe contained a cunning kinde of silence, even as if she were unableto utter one word, seeming hindered by extremity of joy at hispresence, and to make him effectually admire her extraordinarykindnesse, having teares plenteously at commaund, intermixed withsighes and broken speeches, at last, thus she spake.
signior andrea, you are the most welcome friend to me in theworld; sealing this salutation with infinite sweet kisses andembraces: whereat (in wonderfull amazement) he being strangelytransported, replied; madame, you honour me beyond all compasse ofmerit. then, taking him by the hand, shee guided him thorough a goodlyhall, into her owne chamber, which was delicately embalmed with roses,orenge flowers, and all other pleasing smelles, and a costly bed inthe middest, curtained round about, verie artificiall picturesbeautifying the walles, with many other embellishments, such asthose countries are liberally stored withall. he being meerely anovice in these kinds of wanton carriages of the world, and freefrom any base or degenerate conceite; firmely perswaded himselfe, that(questionlesse) she was a lady of no meane esteeme, and he more thenhappy, to be thus respected and honored by her. they both being seatedon a curious chest at the beds feete, teares cunningly trickling downeher cheekes, and sighes intermedled with inward sobbings, breathedfoorth in sad, but verie seemely manner, thus shee beganne.
i am sure andrea, that you greatly marvell at me, in gracing youwith this solemne and kinde entertainment, and why i should so melt myselfe in sighes and teares, at a man that hath no knowledge of mee, orperhaps, sildome or never heard any speeches of mee: but you shallinstantly receive from mee matter to augment your greater marvaile,meeting heere with your owne sister, beyond all hope or expectation ineyther of us both. but seeing that heaven hath beene so gracious tome, to let mee see one of my brethren before i dye (though gladly iwould have seene them all) which is some addition of comfort to me,and that which (happily) thou hast never heard before, in plaine andtruest manner, i will reveale unto thee.
piero, my father and thine, dwelt long time (as thou canst notchoose but to have understood) in palermo; where, through thebounty, and other gracious good parts remaining in him, he was muchrenowned, and to this day, is no doubt remembred, by many of hisloving friends and wellwillers. among them that most intimatelyaffected piero, my mother (who was gentlewoman, and at that time awidow) did deerest of all other love him; so that: forgetting thefeare of her father, brethren, yea, and her owne honour, they becameso privately acquainted, that i was begotten, and am heere now such asthou seest me. afterward, occasions so befalling our father, toabandon palermo, and returne to perouse, he left my mother and mehis little daughter, never after (for ought that i could learne)once remembring either her or me: so that (if he had not beene myfather) i could have much condemned him, in regard of hisingratitude to my mother, and love which hee ought to have shewne meas his childe, being borne of no chamber-maide, neyther of a cittysinner; albeit i must needes say, that she was blame-worthy, withoutany further knowledge of him (rioved onely thereto by most loyalaffection) to commit both her selfe, and all the wealth shee had, intohis hands: but things ill done, and so long time since, are moreeasily controulled, then amended.being left so young at palermo, and growing (well neere) to thestature as now you see me; my mother (being wealthy) gave me inmarriage to one of the gergentes family, a gentleman, and of greatrevennues, who in his love to me and my mother, went and dwelt atpalermo: where falling into the guelphes faction, and making one inthe enterprize with charles our king; it came to passe, that they werediscovered to fredericke king of arragon, before their intent could beput in execution: whereupon, we were enforced to flye from sicily,even when my hope stoode fairely, to have beene the greatest lady inall the island. packing up then such few things as wee could take withus, (few i may well call them, in regard of our wealthy possessions,both in pallaces, houses, and lands, all which we were constrainedto forgo:) we made our recourse to this citty, where we found kingcharles so benigne and gracious to us, that recompencing the greaterpart of our losses, he bestowed lands and houses on us here, besidea continuall large pension to my husband your brother in law, asheereafter himselfe shall better acquaint you withal. thus came ihither, and thus remaine here, where i am able to welcome my brotherandrea, thankes more to fortune, then any friendlinesse in him. withwhich words she embraced and kissed him many times, sighing andweeping as she did before.andrea hearing this fable so artificially delivered, composed frompoint to point with such likely protestations, without faltring orfailing in any one words utterance; and remembring perfectly fortruth, that his father had formerly dwelt at palermo; knowing also (bysome sensible feeling in himselfe) the custome of young people, whoare easily conquered by affection in their youthfull heate, seeingbeside the tears, trembling speeches, and earnest embracings of thiscunning commodity; he tooke all to be true by her thus spoken, andupon her silence, thus replyed. lady, let it not seeme strange to you,that your words have raysed marvell in me, because (indeed) i had noknowledge of you, even no more then as if i had never seene you: neveralso having heard my father speak either of you or your mother (forsome considerations best known unto himselfe:) or if at any time heused such language, either my youth then, or defective memory since,hath utterly lost it. but truely, it is no little joy and comfort tome, to finde a sister here, where i had no such hope or expectation,and where also myselfe am a meere stranger. for to speake my mindefreely of you, and the perfections gracefully appearing in you iknow not any man of how great repute or qualitie soever, but you maywell beseeme his acceptance, much rather then mine, that am but a meanmerchant. but faire sister, i desire to be resolved in one thing, towit; by what means you had understanding of my being in this city?whereto readily she returned him this answer.
brother, a poore woman of this city, whom i employ sometimeshoushold occasions, came to mee this morning, and (having seene you)tolde me, that shee dwelt a long while with our father, both atpalermo and perouse. and because i held it much better beseeming mycondition, to have you visite me in mine owne dwelling, then i to comesee you at a common inne, i made the bolder to send for you hither.after which words, in very orderly manner, she enquired of hischiefest kindred and friends, calling them readily by their propernames, according to her former instructions. whereto andrea still madeher answere, confirming thereby his beliefe of her the morestrongly, and crediting whatsoever she saide, farre better thenbefore.
their conference having long time continued, and the heate of theday being somewhat extraordinary, she called for greeke wine, andbanquetting stuffe, drinking to andrea; and he pledging her verycontentedly. after which, he would have returned to his lodging,because it drew neere supper time; which by no meanes shee wouldpermit, but seeming more then halfe displeased, shee saide. now iplainely perceive brother, how little account you make of me,considering, you are with your owne sister, who (you say) you neversaw before, and in her owne house, whether you should alwayes resortwhen you come to this city; and would you now refuse her, to goe andsup at a common inne? beleeve me brother, you shall sup with me, foralthough my husband is now from home, to my no littlediscontentment: yet you shall find brother, that his wife, can bid youwelcome, and make you good cheere beside.
now was andrea so confounded this extremity of courtesie, that heknew not what to say, but onely thus replied. i love you as a sisterought to be loved, and accept of your exceeding kindnesse: but if ireturne not to my lodging, i shall wrong mine host and his gueststoo much, because they will not sup untill i come. for that (quothshee) we have a present remedy, one of my servants shall goe andgive warning, whereby they shall not tarry your comming. albeit, youmight doe me a great kindnesse, to send for your friends to sup withus here, where i assure ye, they shall finde that your sister (foryour sake) will bid them welcome, and after supper, you may allwalke together to your inne. andrea answered, that he had no suchfriends there, as should be so burthenous to her: but seeing she urgedhim so farre, he would stay to sup with her, and referred himselfesolely to her disposition.
ceremonious shew was made, of sending a servant to the inne, for notexpecting andreas presence at supper, though no such matter wasperformed; but, after divers other discoursings, the table beingcovered, and variety of costly viands placed thereon, downe theysate to feeding, with plenty of curious wines liberally walking about,so that it was darke night before they arose from the table. andreathen offring to take his leave, she would (by no meanes) suffer it,but tolde him, that naples was a citie of such strict lawes andordinances, as admitted no night-walkers, although they werenatives, much lesse strangers, but punnished them with great severity.and therefore, as she had formerly sent word to his inne, that theyshould not expect his comming to supper, the like had she doneconcerning his bed, intending to give her brother andrea one nightslodging, which as easily she could affoord him, as shee had done asupper. all which this new-caught woodcocke verily crediting, and thathe was in company of his owne sister fiordeliza (for so did shecunningly stile her selfe, and in which beleefe he was meerelydeluded) he accepted the more gladly her gentle offer, and concludedto stay there all that night.
after supper, their conference lasted very long, purposely dilatedout in length, that a great part of the night might therein be wasted:when, leaving andrea to his chamber, and a lad to attend, that heshould lacke nothing; she with her women went to their lodgings, andthus our brother and supposed sister were parted. the season thenbeing somewhat hot and soultry, andrea put off his hose and doublet,and being in his shirt alone, layed them underneath the beds boulster,as seeming carefull of his money. but finding a provocation to thehouse of office, he demanded of the lad, where hee might find it;who shewed him a little doore in a corner of the chamber, appointinghim to enter there. safely enough he went in, but chanced to treadupon a board, which was fastened at neither, ende to the joyntswhereon it lay, being a pit-fall made of purpose, to entrap any suchcoxcombe, as would be trained to so base a place of lodging, so thatboth he and the board fell downe together into the draught; yet suchbeing his good fortune, to receive no harme in the fall (although itwas of extraordinary height) onely the filth of the place, (it beingover full) had fowly myred him.
now for your better understanding the quality of the place, and whatensued thereupon, it is not unnecessary to describe it, according to acommon use, observed in those parts. there was a narrow passage orentrie, as often we see reserved betweene two houses, for eithersbenefit to such a needfull place; and boards loosely lay upon thejoynts, which such as were acquainted withall, could easily avoide anyperille in passing to or from the stoole. but our so newly createdbrother, not dreaming to find a queane to his sister, receiving sofoule a fall into the vault, and knowing not how to helpe himselfe,being sorrowfull beyond measure; cryed out to the boy for light andaide, who intended not to give him any. for the crafty wag, (a meeteattendant for so honest a mistresse) no sooner heard him to be fallen,but presently he ran to enforme her thereof, and shee as speedilyreturned to the chamber, where finding his cloathes under the bedshead, shee needed no instruction for search of his pockets. but havingfound the gold, which andrea indiscreetely carried alwayes abouthim, as thinking it could no where else be so safe: this was allshee aymed at, and for which shee had ensnared him, faigning her selfeto be of palermo, and daughter to piero of perouse, so that notregarding him any longer, but making fast the house of office doore,there she left him in that miserable taking.poore andrea perceiving, that his calles could get no answere fromthe lad; cryed out louder, but all to no purpose: when seeing into hisowne simplicity, and understanding his error, though somewhat toolate, hee made such meanes constrainedly, that he got over a wall,which severed that foule sinke from the worlds eye; and being in theopen streete, went to the doore of the house, which then he knew toowell to his cost, making loud exclaimes with rapping and knocking, butall as fruitelesse as before. sorrowing exceedingly, and manifestlybeholding his misfortune; alas (quoth he) how soone have i lost asister, and five hundred crownes besides? with many other words,loud calles, and beatings uppon the doore without intermission, theneighbours finding themselves disturbed, and unable to endure any suchceaselesse vexation, rose from their beddes, and called to him,desiring him to be gone, and let them rest. a maide also of the samehouse, looking forth at the window, and seeming as newly raised fromsleepe, called to him, saying; what noyse is that beneath? whyvirgin (answered andrea) know you not me? i am andrea de piero,brother to your mistresse fiordeliza. thou art a drunken knave replyedthe maide, more full of drinke then wit: goe sleepe, goe sleepe, andcome againe to morrow: for i know no andrea de piero, neither hathmy mistresse any such brother. get thee gone go ie good man, andsuffer us to sleepe i prythee. how now (quoth andrea) doest thou notunderstand what i say? thou knowest that i supt with thy mistressethis night; but if our sicilian kindred be so soone forgot, iprythee give mee my cloathes which i left in my chamber, and thenverie gladly will i get mee gone. hereat the maide laughing outaloude, saide; surely the man is mad, or walketh the streetes in adreame: and so clasping fast the window, away she went and left him.now could andrea assure himselfe, that his golde and cloathes werepast recovery, which mooving him to the mor impatience, his formerintercessions became converted into furie, and what hee could notcompasse by faire intreats, he intended to winne by outrage andviolence: so that taking up a great stone in his hand, hee layedupon the doore verie powerfull strokes. the neighbors hearing thismollestation still, admitting them not the least respite of rest,reputed him for a troublesome fellow, and that he used thosecounterfet words, onely to disturbe the mistresse of the house, andall that dwelled neere about her; looking againe out at theirwindowes, they altogether beganne to rate and reprove him, even likeso many bawling curres, barking at a strange dog passing through thestreet. this is shamefull villany (quoth one) and not to besuffered, that honest women should thus be molested in their houses,with foolish idle words, and at such an unseasonable time of thenight. for gods sake (good man) be gone, and let us sleepe; if thouhave any thing to say to the gentlewoman of the house, come tomorrowin the daytime, and no doubt but she will make thee sufficient answer.
andrea, being some what pacified with these speeches, ashagge-hayr'd swash-buckler, a grim visagde ruffian (as sildomebawdy houses are without such swaggering champions) not seene or heardby andrea, all the while of his being in the house; rapping out two orthree terrible oathes, opening a casement, and with a stearnedreadfull voyce, demanded, who durst keepe that noyse beneath?andrea fearefully looking up, and (by a little glimmering of themoone) seeing such a rough fellow, with a blacke beard, strowting likethe quilles of a porcupine, and patches on his face, for hurtsreceived in no honest quarrels, yawning also and stretching, asangry to have his sleepe disturbed: trembling and quaking, answered; iam the gentlewomans brother of the house. the ruffian interruptinghim, and speaking more fiercely then before; sealing his words withhorrible oathes, said. sirra, rascall, i know not of whence, or whatthou art; but if i come downe to thee, i will so bumbast thy pratingcoxecombe, as thou wast never so beaten in all thy life, like adrunken slave and beast as thou art, that all this night wilt notlet us sleepe. and so hee clapt to the window againe.
the neighbours well acquainted with this ruffians rude conditions,speaking in gentle manner to andrea, said. shift for thy selfe (goodman) in time, and tarrie not for his comming downe to thee, exceptthou art weary of thy life: be gone therefore, and say thou hast afriendly warning. these words dismaying andrea, but much more thesterne oathes and ougly sight of the ruffian, incited also by theneighbours counsell, whom he imagined to advise him in charitablemanner: it caused him to depart thence, taking the way home-ward tohis inne, in no mean affliction and torment of minde, for themonstrous abuse offered him, and losse of his money. well he remembredthe passages, whereby the day before the young gyrle had guided him,but the loathsome smell about him, was so extreamely to himselfe, thatdesiring to wash him at the sea side, he strayed too farre wide on thecontrary hand, wandring up the street called ruga gatellana.
proceeding on still, even to the highest part of the citie, heeespyed a lanthorne and light, as also a man carrying it, and anotherman with him in company, both of them comming towards him. now,because he suspected them two of the watch, or some persons that wouldapprehend him., he stept aside to shunne them, and entred into an oldehouse hard by at hand. the other mens intention was to the very sameplace; and going in, without any knowledge of andreaes beeing there,one of them layde downe divers instruments of iron which he hadbrought thither on his backe, and had much talke with his fellowconcerning those engines. at last one of them saide; i smell themost abhominable stinke that ever i felt in all my life. so, liftingup the lanthorn, he espied poore pittifull andrea, closely couchedbehinde the wall. which sight somewhat affrighting him, he yetboldly demaunded, what and who he was? whereto andrea answerednothing, but lay still and held his peace. neerer they drew towardshim with their light, demanding how hee came thither, and in thatfilthy manner.
constraint having now no other evasion, but that (of necessitie) allmust out: hee related to them the whole adventure, in the same sort asit had befalne him. they greatly pittying his misfortune, one ofthem said to the other: questionlesse, this villanie was done in thehouse of scarabone buttafucco. and then turning to andrea, proceededthus. in good faith poore man, albeit thou hast lost thy money, yetart thou much beholding to fortune, for falling (though in a fouleplace) yet in a succesfull manner, and entring no more backe intothe house. for beleeve mee friend, if thou haddest not falne, butquietly gone to sleepe in the house, that sleepe had beene thy last inthis world, and with thy money, thou hadst lost thy life likewise. butteares and lamentations are now helpelesse, because as easily mayestthou plucke the starres from the firmament, as get againe the leastdoyt of thy losse. and for that shag-haird slave in the house, he willbe thy deathsman, if hee but understand that thou makest anyenquirie after thy money. when he had thus admonished him, he beganalso in this manner to comfort him. honest fellow,- we cannot butpitty thy present condition: wherfore if thou wilt frendly associateus, in a businesse which we are instantly going to effect; thy lossehath not bene so great, but on our words we will warrant thee, thatthine immediate gaine shall farre exceede it. what will not a man(in desperate extremity) both well like and allow of, especiallywhen it carryeth apparance of present comfort. so fared it withandrea, hee perswaded himselfe, worse then had already happened, couldnot befall him; and therefore he would gladly adventure with them.
the selfe same day preceding this disastrous night to andrea, in thecheefe church of the cittie, had beene buried the archbishop of naplesnamed signior phillippo minutulo, in his richest pontificall robes andornaments, and a ruby on his finger valued to be worth five hundredduckets of gold: this dead body they purposed to rob and rifle,acquainting andrea with their whole intent, whose necessitie(coupled with a covetous desire) made him more forward then welladvised, to joyne with them in this sacriligious enterprize. on theywent towards the great church, andreaes unsavourie perfume muchdispleasing them, whereupon the one said to his fellow: can wedevise no ease for this foule and noysome inconveniences? the verysmell of him will be a meanes to betray us. there is a well-pit hardby, answered the other, with a pulley and bucket descending downe intoit, and there we may wash him from this filthinesse. to the well-pitthey came, where they found the rope and pulley hanging readie, butthe bucket for safety was taken away; whereon they concluded, tofasten the rope about him, and so let him downe into the well-pit, andwhen he had washed himselfe, hee should wagge the rope, and thenthey would draw him up againe, which accordingly they forthwithperformed.
now it came to passe, that while he was thus washing himselfe in thewell-pit, the watch of the citie walking the round, and finding itto bee a very hote and sweltring night, they grew dry and thirsty, andtherefore went to the well to drinke. the other two men, perceivingthe watch so neere upon them, left andrea in the pit to shift forhimselfe, running away to shelter themselves. their flight was notdiscovered by the watch, but they comming to the wellpit, andrearemained still in the bottome, and having cleansed himselfe so well ashee could, sate wagging the rope, expecting when hee should be haledup. this dumbe signe the watch discerned not, but sitting downe by thewelles side, they layde downe their billes and other weapons,tugging to draw up the rope, thinking the bucket was fastened thereto,and full of water. andrea being haled up to the pits brim, leftholding the rope any longer, catching fast hold with his hands for hisbetter safety; and the watch at the sight hereof being greatlyagrighted, as thinking that they had dragd up a spirit; not daringto speake one word, ran away with all the hast they could make.
andrea hereat was not a little amazed, so that if he had not takenvery good hold on the brim: he might have falne to the bottome, anddoubtlesse there his life had perished. being come forth of thewell, and treading on billes and halbards, which he well knew that hiscompanions had not brought thither with them; his mervaile so much themore encreased, ignorance and feare still seizing him, with silentbemoaning his many misfortunes, away thence he wandred, but hee wistnot whither. as he went on, he met his two fellowes, who purposelyreturned to drag him out of the well, and seeing their intentalready performed, desired to know who had done it: wherein andreacould not resolve them, rehearsing what hee could, and what weaponshee found lying about the well. whereat they smiled, as knowing,that the watch had haled him up, for feare of whom they left him,and so declared to him the reason of their returne.
leaving off all further talke, because now it was about midnight,they went to the great church, where finding their enterance to beeasie: they approached neere the tombe, which was very great, beingtall of marble, and the cover-stone weighty, yet with crowes of yronand other helps, they raised it so high, that a man might withoutperill passe into it. now began they to question one another, which ofthe three should enter into the tombe. not i, said the first; sosaid the second: no nor i, answered andrea. which when the other twoheard, they caught fast hold of him, saying. wilt not thou goe intothe tombe? be advised what thou sayest, for, if thou wilt not goein: we will so beat thee with one of these yron crowes, that thoushalt never goe out of this church alive.
thus poore andrea is still made a property, and fortune (this fatallnight) will have no other foole but he, as delighting in his hourlydisasters. feare of their fury makes him obedient, into the grave hegoes, and being within, thus consults with himselfe. these cunningcompanions suppose me to be simple, and make me enter the tombe,having an absolute intention to deceive me. for, when i have giventhem all the riches that i finde here, and am ready to come forthfor mine equall portion: away will they runne for their owne safety,and leaving me heere, not onely shall i loose my right among them, butmust remaine to what danger may follow after. having thus meditated,he resolved to make sure of his owne share first, and remembring therich ring, whereof they had tolde him: forthwith hee tooke it from thearchbishops finger, finding it indifferently fitte for his owne.afterward, hee tooke the crosse, miter, rich garments, gloves and all,leaving him nothing but his shirt, giving them all these severallparcels, protesting that there was nothing else. still they pressedupon him, affirming that there was a ring beside, urging him to searchdiligently for it; yet still he answered, that he could not findeit, and for their longer tarrying with him, seemed as if he serchedvery carefully, but all appeared to no purpose.
the other two fellowes, as cunning in craft as the third could be,still willed him to search, and watching their aptest opportunity:tooke away the proppes that supported the tombe-stone, and runningthence with their got booty, left poore andrea mewed up in thegrave. which when he perceived, and saw this miserie to exceede allthe rest, it is farre easier for you to guesse at his greefe, then iam any way, able to expresse it. his head, shoulders, yea all hisutmost strength he employeth, to remove that over-heavy hinderer ofhis libertie: but all his labour beeing spent in vaine, sorrow threwhim in a swoond upon the byshoppes dead body, where if both of themmight at that instant have bin observed, the arch-byshops deadbodie, and andrea in greefe dying, very hardly had bene distinguished.but his senses regaining their former offices, among his silentcomplaints, consideration presented him with choyse of these twounavoydable extremities: dye starving must he in the tombe withputrifaction of the dead bodie; or if any man came to open thegrave, then must he be apprehended as a sacrilegious theefe, and so behanged, according to the lawes in that case provided.
as hee continued in these strange afflictions of minde, sodainelyhee heard a noise in the church of divers men, who (as he imagined)came about the like businesse, as hee and his fellowes hadundertaken before; wherein he was not a jot deceived, albeit his fearethe more augmented. having opened the tombe, and supported thestone, they varied also among themselves for entrance, and anindiffrent while contended about it. at length, a priest being onein the company, boldly said. why how now you white-liver'd rascals?what are you affraid of? do you thinke he will eate you? dead mencannot bite, and therefore i my selfe will go in. having thusspoken, he prepared his entrance to the tomb in such order, that hethrust in his feete before, for his easier descending downe into it.
andrea sitting upright in the tombe, and desiring to make use ofthis happy opportunity, caught the priest fast by one of his legges,making shew as if he meant to dragge him downe. which when thepriest felt, he cryed out aloud, getting out with all the haste hecould make, and all his companions, being well-neere frighted out oftheir wits, ranne away amaine, as if they had bene followed by athousand divels. andrea little dreaming on such fortunate successe,made meanes to get out of the grave, and afterward forth of thechurch, at the very same place where he entred.
now began day-light to appeare, when he (having the rich ring on hisfinger) wandred on hee knew not whether: till comming to the sea side,he found the way directing to his inne, where al his company were withhis host, who had bene verie carefull for him.
having related his manifold mischances, his hoste friendly advisedhim with speede to get him out of naples. as instantly he did,returning home to perouse, having adventured his five hundredcrownes on a ring, wherewith hee purposed to have bought horses,according to the intent of his journey thither.
the second day, the sixt novell
heerein all men are admonished, never to distrust the powerfull
hand of heaven, when fortune seemeth to be most
adverse against them
madame beritola caracalla, was found in an island with two goates,having lost her two sonnes, and thence travailed into lunigiana: whereone of her sonnes became servant to the lord thereof, and was foundsomewhat overfamiliar with his masters daughter, who thereforecaused him to be imprisoned. afterward, when the country of sicelyrebelled against king charles, the aforesaid sonne chanced to beeknowne by his mother, and was married to his masters daughter. and hisbrother being found likewise, they both returned to great estate andcredit.
the ladies and gentlemen also, having smiled sufficiently at theseverall accidents which did befall the poore traveller andrea,reported at large by madam fiammetta, the lady aimillia seeing hertale to be fully concluded, began (by commandement of the queene) tospeak in this manner.
the diversitie of changes and alterations in fortune as they aregreat, so must they needs be greevous; and as often as we takeoccasion to talke of them, so often do they awake and quicken ourunderstandings, avouching, that it is no easie matter to depend uponher flatteries. and i am of opinion, that to heare them recounted,ought not any way to offend us, be it of men wretched, or fortunate;because, as they instruct the one with good advice, so they animatethe other with comfort. and therefore, although great occasions havebeene already related, yet i purpose to tell a tale, no lesse truethen lamentable; which albeit it sorted to a successefull ending,yet notwithstanding, such and so many were the bitter thwartings, ashardly can i beleeve, that ever any sorrow was more joyfully sweetned.
you must understand then (most gracious ladies) that after the deathof fredericke the second emperour, one named manfred, was crowned kingof sicily, about whom, lived in great account and authority, aneapolitane gentleman, called henriet capece, who had to wife abeautifull gentlewoman, and a neapolitane also, named madam beritolacaracalla. this henriet held the government of the kingdome of sicily,and understanding that king charles the first, had wonne the battle atbeneventum, and slaine king manfred, the whole kingdome revolting alsoto his devotion, and little trust to be reposed in the sicillians,or he willing to subject himselfe to his lordes enemie; provided forhis secret flight from thence. but this being discovered to thesicillians, he and many more, who had beene loyall servants to kingmanfred, were suddenly taken and imprisoned by king charles, and thesole possession of the iland confirmed to him.
madam beritola not knowing (in so sudden and strange an alterationof state affaires) what was become of her husband, fearing alsogreatly before, those inconveniences which afterward followed; beingovercome with many passionate considerations, having left and forsakenall her goods, going aboord a small barke with a sonne of hers, agedabout some eight yeeres, named geoffrey, and growne great with childwith another, she fled thence to lapary, where she was brought tobed of another sonne, whom she named (answerable both to his and herhard fortune,) the poore expelled.
having provided her selfe of a nurse, they altogether went aboardagaine, setting sayle for naples to visit her parents; but itchanced quite contrary to her expectation, because by stormie windesand weather, the vessell being bound for naples, was hurried to theile of ponzo, where entring into a small port of the sea, theyconcluded to make their aboade, till a time more furtherous shouldfavour their voyage.
as the rest, so did madam beritola goe on shore in the iland,where having found a separate and solitary place, fit for her silentand sad meditations, secretly by her selfe, shee sorrowed for theabsence of her husband. resorting daily to this her sad exercise,and continuing there her complaints, unseene by any of themarriners, or whosoever else: there arrived suddenly a galley ofpyrates, who seazing on the small barke, carried it and all the restin it away with them. when beritola had finished het wofullcomplaints, as daily shee was accustomed to doe, shee returned backeto her children againe; but find no person there remayning, whereatshe wondered not a little: immediately (suspecting what had happenedindeede) she lent her lookes on the sea, and saw the galley, whichas yet had not gone farre, drawing the smaller vessell after her.hereby plainly she perceyved, that now she had lost her children, asformerly shee had done her husband; being left there poore,forsaken, and miserable, not knowing when, where, or how to findeany of them againe; and calling for her husband and children, sheefell downe in a swound uppon the shore.
now was not any body neere, with coole water or any other remedyto helpe the recovery of her lost powers; wherefore her spiritsmight the more freely wander at their owne pleasure: but after theywere returned backe againe, and had won their wonted offices in herbody, drowned in teares, and wringing her hands, she did nothing butcall for her children and husband, straying all about in hope to findethem, seeking in caves, dens, and every where else, that presented theverie least glimpse of comfort. but when she saw all her paines sortto no purpose, and darke night drawing swiftly on, hope and dismayraising infinite perturbations, made her yet to be somewhat respectiveof her selfe, and therefore departing from the sea-shore, she returnedto the solitary place, where she used to sigh and mourne alone byher selfe.
the night being over-past with infinite feares and afrights, andbright day saluting the world againe, with the expence of ninehoures and more, she fell to her former fruitlesse travailes. beingsomewhat sharply bitten with hunger, because the former day andnight shee had not tasted any foode: shee made therefore a benefitof necessity, and fed on the greene hearbes so well as she could,not without any piercing afflictions, what should become of her inthis extraordinary misery. as shee walked in these pensivemeditations, she saw a goate enter into a cave, and (within a whileafter) come forth againe, wandring along thorow the woods. whereuponshe stayed, and entred where she saw the beast issue foorth, where shefound two young kids, yeaned (as it seemed) the selfesame day, whichsight was very pleasing to her, and nothing in that distresse couldmore content her.
as yet, she had milke freshly running in both her brests, byreason of her so late delivery in child bed; wherefore shee laydowne unto the two yong kids, and taking them tenderly in her armes,suffered each of them to sucke a teate, whereof they made not anyrefusall, but tooke them as lovingly as their dammes, and from thattime forward, they made no distinguishing betweene their damme andher. thus this unfortunate lady, having found some company in thissolitary desart, fed on herbes and roots, drinking faire runningwater, and weeping silently to her selfe, so often as she remembredher husband, children, and former dayes past in much better manner.heere she resolved now to live and dye, being at last deprived both ofthe damme and yonger kids also, by theyr wandering further into theneere adjoyning woods, according to their naturall inclinations;whereby the poore distressed ladie became more savage and wilde in herdaily conditions, then otherwise shee would have bene.
after many monthes were over-passed, at the very same place whereshe tooke landing; by chance, there arrived another small vessell ofcertaine pisans, which remained there divers daies. in this barkewas a gentleman, named conrado de marchesi malespini, with his holyand vertuous wife, who were returned backe from a pilgrimage, havingvisited all the sanctified places that then were in the kingdome ofapulia, and now were bound homeward to their owne abiding. thisgentleman, for the expelling of melancholly perturbations, oneespeciall day amongst other, with his wife, servants, and waintinghounds, wandred up into the iland not far from the place of madamberitolaes desert dwelling. the hounds questing after game, at lasthappened on the two kids where they were feeding, and (by this time)had attained to indifferent growth; and finding themselves thuspursued by the hounds, fled to no other part of the wood, then tothe cave where beritola remained, and seeming as if they sought tobe rescued only by her, she sodainly caught up a staffe, and forcedthe hounds thence to flight.
by this time, conrado and his wife, who had followed closely afterthe hounds, was come thither, and seeing what had hapned, looking onthe lady, who was become blacke, swarthy, meager, and hairy, theywondered not a little at her, and she a great deale more at them. when(uppon her request) conrado had checkt backe his hounds, theyprevailed so much by earnest intreaties, to know what she was, and thereason of her living there; that she intirely related her quality,unfortunate accidents, and strange determination for living there.which when the gentleman had heard, who very well knew her husband,compassion forced teares from his eyes, and earnestly he laboured bykinde perswasions, to alter so cruell a deliberation; making anhonourable offer, for conducting her home to his owne dwelling,where shee should remaine with him in noble respect, as if she werehis owne sister, without parting from him, till fortune should smileas fairely on her, as ever she had done before.
when these gentle offers could not prevaile with her, thegentleman left his wife in her company, saying, that he would go fetchsome foode for her; and because her garments were all rent andtorne, hee would bring her other of his wives, not doubting but towinne her thence with them. his wife abode there with beritola,verie much bemoaning her great disasters: and when both viands andgarments were brought, by extremitie of intercession, they causedher to put them on, and also to feede with them, albeit sheeprotested, that shee would not part thence into any place, where anyknowledge should be taken of her. in the end, they perswaded her to gow-th them into lunigiana, carrying also with her the two yong goatsand their damme, which were then in the cave altogether, prettilyplaying before beritola, to the great admiration of conrado and hiswife, as also the servants attending on them.
when the windes and weather grew favourable for them, madameberitola went aboord with conrado and his wife, being followed bythe two young goates and their damme; and because her name shouldbee knowne to none but conrado, and his wife onely, shee would bestiled no otherwise but the goatherdesse. merrily, yet gently blew thegale, which brought them to enter the river of maira, where going onshore, and into their owne castle, beritola kept company with the wifeof conrado, but in a mourning habite; and a waiting gentlewoman oftheirs, honest, humble, and very dutifull, the goates alwayesfamiliarly keeping them company.
returne wee now to the pyrates, which at ponzo seized on the smallbarke wherein madame beritola was brought thither, and carriedthence away, without any sight or knowledge of her. with such otherspoyles as they had taken, they shaped their course for geneway, andthere (by consent of the patrones of the galley) made a division oftheir booties. it came to passe, that (among other things) the nursethat attended on beritola, and the two children with her, fell tothe share of one messer gastarino d'oria, who sent them together tohis owne house, there to be employed in service as servants. the nurseweeping beyond measure for the losse of her ladie, and bemoaning herowne miserable fortune, whereinto shee was now fallen with the twoyoung laddes; after long lamenting, which shee found utterlyfruitlesse and to none effect, though she was used as a servant withthem, and being but a very poore woman, yet was shee wise anddiscreetly advised. wherefore, comforting both her selfe and them sowell as she could, and considering the depth of their disaster, sheeconceited thus, that if the children should be knowne, it mightredound to their greater danger, and shee be no way advantagedthereby.
hereupon, hoping that fortune (earely or late) would alter herstearne malice, and that they might (if they lived) regaine oncemore their former condition, shee would not disclose them to any onewhatsoever, till shee should see the time aptly disposed for thesecond day, the sixt 75
it. being thus determined, to all such as questioned herconcerning them, she answered that they were her owne children, namingthe eldest not geoffrey, but jehannot de procida. as for theyongest, shee cared not greatly for changing his name, and thereforewisely informed geoffrey, upon what reason shee had altered hisname, and what danger he might fall into, if he should otherwise bediscovered; being not satisfied with thus telling him once, butremembring him thereof verie often, which the gentle youth (being sowell instructed by the wise and carefull nurse) did very warilyobserve.
the two young laddes, verie poorely garmented, but much worsehosed and shodde, continued thus in the house of gasparino, where boththey and the nurse were long time employed about verie base anddrudging offices, which yet they endured with admirable patience.but jehannot, aged already about sixteene yeeres, having a loftierspirit, then belonged to a slavish servant, despising the basenesse ofhis servile condition; departed from the drudgery of messer gasparino,and going aboord the gallies which were bound for alexandria, fortunedinto many places, yet none of them affoording him any advancement.in the end, about three or foure yeeres after his departure fromgasparino, being now a brave yong man, and of very goodly forme: heunderstood, that his father (whom he supposed to be dead) was as yetliving, but in captivity, and prisoner to king charles. wherefore,despairing of any successefull fortune, he wandred here and there,till he came to lunigiana, and there (by strange accident) he becameservant to messer conrado malespino, where the service proved wellliking to them both.
very sildome times hee had a sight of his mother, because sheealwayes kept company with conradoes wife; and yet when they camewithin view of each other, shee knew not him, nor he her, so muchyeres had altred them both from what they were wont to be, and whenthey saw each other last. jehannot being thus in the service of messerconrado, it fortuned that a daughter of his, named sophia, being thewiddow of one messer nicolas grignam, returned home to her fathershouse. very beautifull and amiable she was, young likewise, aged butlittle above sixteene; growing wonderously amorous of jehannot, and heof her, in extraordinary and most fervent manner: which love was notlong without full effect, continuing many moneths before any personcould perceyve it: which making them to build on the more assurance,they began to carry their meanes with lesse discretion then isrequired in such nice cases, and which cannot be too providentlymanaged.
upon a day, he and she walking to a goodly wood, plentifullyfurnished with spreading trees: having out gone the rest of theircompany, they made choise of a pleasant place, very daintily shadedand beautified with all sorts of flowers. there they spent some timein amorous talking, beside some other sweete embraces, which though itseemed over-short to them, yet was it so unadvisedly prolonged, thatthey were on a sodain surprized, first by the mother, and next bymesser conrado himselfe; who greeving beyond measure, to be thustreacherously dealt withall, caused them to be apprehended by three ofhis servants; and (without telling them any reason why) led bound toanother castle of his, and fretting with extremity rage, concludedin his minde, that they should both shamefully be put to death.
the mother unto this regardlesse daughter, having heard the angriewordes of her husband, and how hee would be revenged on the faulty;could not endure that he should be so severe: wherefore, although sheewas likewise much afflicted in minde, and reputed her daughterworthy (for so great an offence) of all cruell punnishment, yet shehasted to her displeased husband, and began to entreate, that heewould not runne on in such a furious spleene, now in his aged yeeresto be the murtherer of his owne childe, and soile his hands in theblood of his servant. rather he might finde out some milde coursefor the satisfaction of his anger, by committing them to closeimprisonment, there to remaine and mourne for their folly committed.the vertuous and religious lady alledged so many commendable examples,and used such plenty of moving perswasions, that she quite altredhis minde from putting them to death, and hee commanded onely, thatthey should separately be imprisoned, with little store of food, andlodging of the uneasiest, untill he should otherwise determine ofthem; and so it was done. what their life now was in captivity andcontinuall teares, with stricter abstinence then was needefull forthem, all this i must commit to your consideration. jehannot and spinaremaining in this comfortlesse condition, and an whole yeere being nowout-worne, yet conrado keeping them thus still imprisoned: it cameto passe, that don pedro king of arragon, by the meanes of messer johnde procida, caused the isle of sicily to revolt, and tooke it awayfrom king charles; whereat conrado (he being of the ghibbilinefaction) not a little rejoyced. jehannot having intelligencethereof, by some of them that had him in custody, breathing foorth avehement sighe, spake in this manner. alas poore miserable wretch as iam! that have already gone begging thorough the world above foureteeneyeeres, in expectation of nothing else but this opportunity; and nowit is come, must i be in prison, to the end, that i should nevermore hope for any future happinesse? and how can i get forth of thisprison, except it bee by death onely? how now, replyed the officerof the guard? what doth this businesse of great kings concerne thee?what affayres hast thou in sicily?
once more jehannot sighed extreamly, and returned him this answer.me thinkes my heart (quoth hee) doeth cleave in sunder, when i call tominde the charge which my father had there; for although i was but alittle boy when i fled thence, yet i can well remember, that i saw himgovernor there, at such time as king manfred lived. the guard,pursuing on still his purpose, demanded of him, what and who hisfather was? my father (replied jehannot?) i may now securely speake ofhim, being out of the perill which neerely concerned me if i had beenediscovered: he was the named (and so still if he be living) henrietcapece, and my name is geoffrey, and not jehannot; and i make nodoubt, but if i were freed from hence, and might returned home tosicily, i should (for his sake) be placed in some authority.
the honest man of the guard, without seeking after any furtherinformation; so soone as he could compasse any leysure, reported allto messer conrado, who having heard these newes (albeit he made noshew thereof to the revealer) went to madam beritola, graciouslydemaunding of her, if she had any sonne by her husband, who was calledgeoffrey. the lady replyed in teares, that if her eldest sonne were asyet living, he was so named, and now aged about two and twenty yeeres.conrado hearing this, imagined this same to be the man; consideringfurther withall, that if it fell out to prove so, hee might have thebetter meanes of mercie, and closely concealing his daughters shame,joyfully joyne them in marriage together.
hereupon, he secretly called jehannot before him, examining himparticularly of all his passed life, and finding (by most manifestarguments) that his name was truly geoffrey, and the eldest son ofhenriet capece, he spake thus to him. jehannot, thou knowest how greatthe injuries are that thou hast done me, and my deere daughter; gentlyintreating thee (as became an honest servant) that thou shouldestalwayes have bene respective of mine honor, and all that appertaineunto me. there are many noble gentlemen, who sustaining the wrongwhich thou hast offred me, they would have procured thy shamefulldeath, which pitty and compassion will not suffer in me. whereforeseeing (as thou informest me) that thou art honourably derived both byfather and mother, i will give end to all thy anguishes, even when thyselfe art so pleased, releasing thee from that captivity wherein ihave so long kept thee, and in one instant, reduce thine honor andmine into compleat perfection. as thou knowest my daughter spina, whomthou hast embraced as a friend (although far unfitting for thee, orher) is a widdow, and her marriage is both great and good; what hermanners and conditions are, thou indifferently knowest, and art notignorant of her father and mother: concerning thine owne estate, asnow i purpose not to speake any thing. therefore, when thou wilt, i amdetermined, that whereas thou hast immodestly affected her, sheshall become thy honest wife, and accepting thee as my sonne, toremaine with me so long as you both please.
imprisonment had somwhat mishapen jehannot in his outward forme, butnot impaired a jot of his noble spirit; much lesse the true love whichhe bare his friend. and although most earnestly he desired thatwhich now conrado had so frankly offered him, and was in his poweronely to bestow on him; yet could he not cloud any part of hisgreatnes, but with a resolved judgement, thus replied. my lord,affectation of rule, desire of welthy possessions, or any other matterwhatsoever could never make me a traitor to you or yours; but that ihave loved, do love, and for ever shal love your beauteous daughter:if that be treason, i do free confesse it, and will die a thousanddeaths before you or any else shall enforce me to deny it, for ihold her highly worthy of my love. if i have bin more unmannerlywith her then became me, i have committed but that error, whichevermore is so attendant uppon youth; that to deny, is to denieyouth also. and if reverend age would but remember, that once he wasyoung and measure others offences by his owne, they would not bethoght so great, as you (and many more) account them to be, mine beingcommitted as a friend, and not as an enemy. what you make offer ofso willingly, i have alwayes desired; and if i had thought it wouldhave beene granted, long since i had most humbly requested it: andso much the more acceptable would it have bin to me, by how much thefurther off it stood from my hopes. but if you bee so forward asyour words doe witnesse, then feed me not with any furtherfruitlesse expectation; but rather send me backe to prison, and lay asmany afflictions on me as you please. for my endeered love to yourdaughter spina, maketh mee to love you the more for her sake, howhardly soever you intreat me; and bindeth me in the greaterreverence to you, as being the father of my fairest friend.
messer conrado hearing these words, stood as one confounded withadmiration, reputing him to be a man of loftie spirit, and hisaffection most fervent to his daughter, which was not a little tohis liking. wherefore, embracing him, and kissing his cheeke,without any longer dallying, hee sent in like manner for his daughter.her restraint in prison, had made her lookes meager, pale, andwanne, and very weake was she also of her person, faire differing fromthe woman she was wont to be, before be, before her affection tojehannot. there in presence of her father, and with free consent ofeither, they were contracted as man and wife, and the espousals agreedon according to custome. some few dayes after, (without any onesknowledge of that which was done) having furnished them with allthings fit for the purpose, and time aptly serving, that the mothersshould be partakers in this joy; he called his wife, and madamberitola, to whom first he spake in this manner.
what will you say madame, if i cause you to see your eldest son, notlong since married to one of my daughters? whereunto beritola thusreplied. my lord, i can say nothing else unto you, but that i shalbe much more obliged to you, then already i am; and the rather,because you will let me see the thing which is deerer then mine ownelife; and rendering it unto me in such manner as you speake of, youwill recall backe some part of my former lost hopes: and with thesewords, the teares streamed aboundantly from her eyes. then turningto his wife, he said: and you deere love, if i shew you such a sonin law, what will you thinke of it? sir (quoth she) what pleaseth you,must and shall satisfie me, be he gentleman or beggar. well saidmadam, answered messer conrado, i hope shortly, to make you bothjoyfull. so when the amorous couple had recovered their formerfeature, and honorable garments prepared for them, privately thus hesaid to geoffrey; beyond the joy which already thou art inrichedwithall, how would it please thee to meete thine owne mother here? icannot beleeve sir (replied geoffrey) that her greevous misfortuneshave suffered her to live so long; and yet, if heaven hath bin somercifull to her, my joyes were incomparable, for by her graciouscounsel, i might well hope to recover no meane happines in sicily.soone after, both the mothers were sent for, who were transported withunspeakable joy, when they beheld the so lately married couple:being much amazed what inspiration had guided messer conrado to thisextraordinary benignity, in joyning jehannot in marriage with spina.hereupon, madam beritola remembring the speeches betweene her andmesser conrado, began to observe him very advisedly; and by a hiddenvertue which long had silently slept in her, and now with joy ofspirit awaked, calling to mind the lineatures of her sonnes infancy,without awaiting for any other demonstration, she folded him in herarmes with earnest affection. motherly joy and pity now contended soviolently togither, that she was not able to utter one word, thesensitive vertues being so closely combined, that (even as dead) shefell downe in the armes of her son. and he wondering greatlythereat, making a better recollection of his thoughts, did wellremember, that hee had often before seene her in the castle, withoutany other knowledge of her. neverthelesse, by meere instinct ofnature, whose power in such actions declares it selfe to be highlypredominant; his very soule assured him, that she was his mother,and blaming his understanding, that he had not before bene betteradvised, he threw his armes about her, and wept exceedingly.
afterward, by the loving paines of conradoes wife, as also herdaughter spina, madam beritola (being recovered from her passionatetraunce, and her vitall spirits executing their offices againe) fellonce more to the embracing of her sonne, kissing him infinite times,with teares and speeches of motherly kindnesse, he likewise expressingthe same dutifull humanity to her. which ceremonious courtesiesbeing passed over and over, to no little joy in all the beholders,beside repetition of their severall misfortunes, messer conrado madeall knowne to his friends, who were very glad of this new alliancemade by him, which was honoured with many solemne feastings. whichbeing all concluded, geoffrey having found out fit place andopportunity, for conference with his new created father, without anysinister opposition, began as followeth.
honourable father, you have raised my contentment to the highestdegree, and have heaped also many gracious favours on my noble mother;but now in the finall conclusion, that nothing may remaine uneffected,which consisteth in your power to performe: i would humbly entreateyou, to honour my mother with your company, at a feast of my making,where i would gladly also have my brother present. messer gasparinod'oria (as i have heretofore told you) questing as a common pyrat onthe seas, tooke us and sent us home to his house as slaves, where(as yet) he detaineth him. i would likewise have you send into sicily,who informing himselfe more amply in the state of the countrey, mayunderstand what is become of henriet my father, and whether he beliving or no. if he be alive, then to know in what condition he is;and being secretly instructed in all things, then to returne backeagaine to you.
this motion made by geoffrey, was so pleasing to conrado, thatwithout any reference to further leysure, hee dispatched thence twodiscreete persons, the one to geneway, and the other to sicily: hewhich went for geneway, having met with gasparino, earnestly entreatedhim (on the behalfe of conrado) to send him the poore expelled; andhis nurse recounting every thing in order, which conrado had toldehim, concerning geoffrey and his mother. when gasparino had heardthe whole discourse, he marvelled greatly thereat, and saide; trueit is, that i will doe any thing for messer conrado, which may beeto his love and liking, provided, that it lye in my power to performe;and (about some foureteene yeeres since) i brought such a lad as youseeke for, with his mother, home to my house, whom i will gladlysend unto him. but you may tell him from me, that i advise him fromover-rash crediting the fables of jehannot, that now termes himselfeby the name of geoffrey, because he is a more wicked boy then hetaketh him to be, and so did i finde him.
having thus spoken, and giving kinde welcome to the messenger,secretly he called the nurse unto him, whom hee heedfully examinedconcerning this case. she having heard the rebellion in the kingdomeof sicily; and understanding withall that henriet was yet living,joyfully threw off all her former feare, relating every thing to himorderly, and the reasons moving her to conceale the whole businesse insuch manner as shee had done. gasparino well perceiving, that thereport of the nurse, and the message received from conrado, varied notin any one circumstance, began the better to credit her words. andbeing a man most ingenious, making further inquisition into thebusinesse, by all the possible meanes hee could devise; and findingevery thing to yeeld undoubted assurance, ashamed of the vile and baseusage wherein he had so long time kept the lad, and desiring (by hisbest meanes) to make him amends, he had a beautifull daughter, agedabout thirteene yeares, and knowing what manner of man he was, hisfather henriet also yet living, he gave her to him in marriage, with avery bountifull and honourable dowry.
the joviall dayes of feasting being past, he went aboord a galleywith the poore expelled, his daughter, the ambassador, and thenurse, departing thence to lericy, where they were nobly welcommedby messer conrado, and his castle being not farre from thence, with anhonourable traine they were conducted thither, and entertained withall possible kindnesse. now concerning the comfort of the mother,meeting so happily with both her sonnes, the joy of the brethren andmother together, having also found the faithful nurse, gasparino andhis daughter, in company now with conrado and his wife, friends,familiars, and all generally in a jubilee of rejoycing: it exceedethcapacity in mee to expresse it, and therefore i referre it to yourmore able imagination.
in the time of this mutuall contentment, to the end that nothingmight be wanting to compleat and perfect this universall joy; ourlord, a most abundant bestower where he beginneth, added long wishedtydings concerning the life and good estate of henry capece. for, evenas they were feasting, and the concourse great of worthy guests,both lords and ladies; the first service was scarsely set on thetables, but the ambassador which was sent to sicily, arrived therebefore them. among many other important matters, he spake ofhenriet, who being so long a time detained in prison by kingcharles, when the commotion arose in the citty against the king; thepeople (grudging at henriets long imprisonment) slew the guards, andset him at liberty. then as capitall enemie to king charles, hee wascreated captaine generall, following the chase, and killing thefrench.
now by this meanes, he grew great in the grace of king pedro, whoreplanted him in all the goods and honours which he had before, withverie high and eminent authority. hereunto the ambassador added,that hee was entertayned with extraordinary grace, and delivery ofpublike joy and exaltation, when his wife and sonne were knowne tobe living, of whom no tydings had at any time bene heard, since thehoure of his surprizall. moreover, that a swift winged bark was nowsent thither (upon the happy hearing of this newes) well furnishedwith noble gentlemen, to attend till their returning backe. we needeto make no doubt concerning the tydings brought by this ambassadour,nor of the gentlemens welcome, thus sent to madame beritola andgeoffrey; who before they would sit downe at the table, saluted messerconrado and his kinde lady (on the behalfe of henriet) for all thegreat graces extended to her and her sonne, with promise of any thing,lying in the power of henriet, to rest continually at their command.the like they did to signior gasparino (whose liberall favours cameunlooked for) with certaine assurance, that when henriet shouldunderstand what he had done for his other sonne, the poore expelled,there would be no defaylance of reciprocall courtesies.
as the longest joyes have no perpetuity of lasting, so all thesegraceful ceremonies had their conclusion, with as many sighes andteares at parting, as joyes abounded at their first encountring.imagine then, that you see such aboord, as were to have here no longerabiding, madam beritola and geoffrey, with the rest; as the pooreexpelled, the so late married wives, and the faithfull nurse bearingthem company. with prosperous windes they arrived in sicily, where thewife, sonnes, and daughters, were joyfully met by henriet atpalermo, and with such honourable pompe, as a case so importantequally deserved. the histories make further mention, that therethey lived (a long while after) in much felicitie, with thankfullhearts (no doubt) in heaven, in acknowledgement of so many greatmercies received.
the second day, the seventh novell
a lively demonstration, that the beauty of a woman (oftentimes)
is very hurtfull to her selfe, and the occasion
of many evils, yea, and of death, to divers men
the soldan of babylon sent one of his daughters, to be joyned inmarriage with the king of cholcos, who by divers accidents (in thespace of foure yeeres) happened into the custodie of nine men, andin sundry places. at length, being restored backe to her father, shewent to the saide king of cholcos, as a maid, and as at first shewas intended to be his wife.
peradventure the novell related by madam aemillia, did not extend itselfe so farre in length, as it mooved compassion in the ladiesmindes, the hard fortunes of beritol and her children, which hadincited them to weeping: but that it pleased the queen (upon the talesconclusion) to command pamphilus, to follow next in order with hisdiscourse; and he being thereto very obedient, began in this manner.
it is a matter of no meane difficulty (vertuous ladies) for us totake intire knowledge of every thing we doe, because (as oftentimeshath bene observed) many men, imagining if they were rich, they shouldlive securely, and without any cares. and therefore, not onely havetheyr prayers and intercessions aimed at that end, but also theirstudies and daily endevours, without refusall of any paines orperils have not meanely expressed their hourely solicitude. andalthough it hath happened accordingly to them, and their covetousdesires fully accomplished; yet at length they have mette with suchkinde people, who likewise thirsting after their wealthypossessions, have bereft them of life, being their kinde andintimate friends, before they attained to such riches. some other,being of lowe and base condition, by adventuring in many skirmishesand foughten battels, trampling in the bloud of their brethren andfriends, have bene mounted to the soveraigne dignity of kingdomes(beleeving that therein consisted the truest happinesse) but boughtwith the deerest price of their lives. for, beside their infinit caresand feares wherewith such greatnesse is continually attended, at theroyall tables, they have drunke poyson in a golden pot. many otherin like manner (with most earnest appetite) have coveted beauty andbodily strength, not foreseeing with any judgement, that thesewishes were not without perill; when being endued with them, theyeither have bene the occasion of their death, or such a lingeringlamentable estate of life, as death were a thousand times more welcometo them.
but, because i would not speake particularly of all our fraile andhumane affections, i dare assure ye, that there is not any one ofthese desires to be elected among us mortals, with entire forsightor providence, warrantable against their ominous yssue. wherefore,if we would walke directly, wee should dispose our willes andaffections, to be guided onely by him, who best knoweth what isneedfull for us, and will bestow them at his good pleasure. nor let melay this blamefull imputation uppon men onely, for offending in manythrough over lavish desires: because you your selves (gracious ladies)sinne highly in one, as namely, in coveting to be beautifull. sothat it is not sufficient for you, to enjoy those beauties bestowne onyou by nature; but you practice to increase them by the rarities ofart. wherefore, let it not offend you, that i tell you the hardfortune of a faire sarazine, to whom it hapned by straunge adventures,that within the compasse of foure yeares, nine severall times to bemarried. and onely for her beauty.
it is now a long time since, that there lived soldane in babylon,named beminidab, to whom (while he lived) many things happened,answerable to his owne desires. among divers other children bothmale and female, hee had a daughter called alathiella, and shee(according to the common voyce of every one that saw her) was thefayrest lady then living in all the world. and because the king ofcholcos had wonderfully assisted him, in a most valiant foughtenbattell against a mighty armie of arabians, who on a sodaine hadassailed him; he demanded his faire daughter in marriage, whichlikewise was kindly granted to him. whereupon a goodly andwell-armed ship was prepared for her, with full furnishment of allnecessary provision, and accompanied with an honourable traine both oflords and ladies, as also most costly and sumptuous accoustrements;commending her to the mercy of heaven, in this maner was she sentaway.
the time being propitious for their parting thence, the marinershoised their sayles, leaving the port of alexandria, and saylingprosperously many dayes together. when they had past the countrey ofsardinia, and (as they imagined) were well neere to their journeyesend; sodainely arose boysterous and contrary windes, which were soimpetuous beyond all measure, and so tormented the ship wherein thelady was; that the mariners seeing no signe of comfort, gave overall hope of escaping with life. neverthelesse, as men most expert inimplacable dangers, they laboured to their uttermost power, andcontended with infinite blustring tempests, for the space of two dayesand nights together, hoping the third day would prove more favourable.but therein they saw themselves deceyved, for the violence continuedstill, encreasing in the night time more and more, being not any wayable to comprehend either where they were, or what course theytooke, neither by marinall judgement, or any apprehension elsewhatsoever, the heavens were so clouded, and the nights darkenesseso extreame.beeing (unknowne to them) neere the isle of majorica, they felt theshippe to split in the bottome: by meanes whereof, perceiving now nohope of escaping (every one caring for himselfe, and not any other)they threw foorth a squiffe on the troubled waves, reposing moreconfidence of safety that way, then abiding any longer in the brokenship. howbeit such as were first descended downe, made stoutresistance against all other followers, with their drawne weapons: butsafety of life so far prevayled, that what with the tempests violence,and over lading of the squiffe, it sunke to the bottome, and allperished that were therein. the ship being thus split, and more thenhalfe full of water, tossed and tormented by the blustring windes,first one way, and then another: was at last driven into a strond ofthe isle majorica, no other persons therein remaining, but onely thelady and her women, all of them (through the rude tempest, and theirowne conceived feare) lying still, as if they were more then halfedead. and there, within a stones cast of the neighboring shore theship (by the rough surging billowes) was fixed fast in the sands,and so continued all the rest of the night, without any furthermolestation of the windes.
when day appeared, and the violent stormes were more mildly appeasedthe ladie, who seemed well-neere dead, lifted up her head, and began(weake as she was) to call first one, and then another: but sheecalled in vaine, for such as she named were farre enough from her.wherefore, hearing no answere, nor seeing any one, she wondredgreatly, her feares encreasing then more and more. raising her selfeso well as shee could, she beheld the ladies that were of her company,and some other of her women, lying still without any stirring:whereupon, first jogging one, and then another, and calling themseverally by their names; shee found them bereft of understanding, andeven as if they were dead, their hearts were so quayled, and theirfeare so over-ruling, which was no meane dismay to the poore ladyher selfe. neverthelesse, necessity now being her best counsellor,seeing her selfe thus all alone, and not knowing in what place sheewas, shee used such meanes to them that were living, that (at thelast) they came to better knowledge of themselves. and being unable toguesse, what was become of the men and marriners, seeing the ship alsodriven on the sands, and filled with water, she began with them tolament most greevously: and now it was about the houre of mid day,before they could descry any person on the shore, or any els to pitythem in so urgent a necessity.
at length, noone being past, a gentleman named bajazeth, attended bydivers of his followers on horsebacke, and returning from a countriehouse belonging to him, chanced to ride by on the sands. uppon sightof the ship lying in that case, he imagined truely what had hapned,and commanded one of his men to enter aboord it, which (with somedifficultie) hee did, to resolve his lord what remained therein. therehee found the faire yong lady, with such small store of company as wasleft her, fearefully hidden under the prow of the ship. so soone asthey saw him, they held up their hands, wofully desiring mercy of him:but he perceiving their lamentable condition, and that hee understoodenot what they saide to him, their affliction grew the greater,labouring by signes and gestures, to give him knowledge of theirmisfortune.
the servant gathering what he could by their outward behaviour,declared to his lord what hee had seene in the ship; who caused thewomen to be brought on shore, and all the precious things remainingwith them; conducting them with him to a place not far off, where withfood and warmth he gave them comfort. by the rich garments which thelady was cloathed withall, he reputed her to be a gentlewoman wellderived, as the great reverence done to her by the rest, gave him goodreason to conceive. and although her lookes were pale and wan, as alsoher person mightily altered, by the tempestuous violence of the sea:yet notwithstanding, she appeared faire and lovely in the eye ofbajazeth, whereupon forthwith he determined, that if she were notmarried, hee would enjoy her as his owne in marriage: or if he couldnot winne her to bee his wife, yet (at the least) shee should be hisfriend, because she remained now in his power.
bajazeth was a man of stearne lookes, rough and harsh both in speechand behaviour; yet causing the lady to be honourably used divers dayestogether, shee became thereby well comforted and recovered. and seeingher beautie to exceede all comparison, he was afflicted beyondmeasure, that he could not understand her, nor she him, whereby heecould not know of whence or what she was. his amorous flamesencreasing more and more; by kinde, courteous, and affable actions, helaboured to compasse what he aymed at. but all his endeavour proved tono purpose, for she refused all familiar privacie with him, which somuch the more kindled the fury of his fire. this being well observedby the lady, having now remained there a moneth and more, andcollecting by the customes of the countrey, that she was among turkes;and in such a place, where although she were knowne, yet it wouldlittle advantage her; beside, that long protraction of time wouldprovoke bajazeth by faire meanes or force to obtaine his will: shepropounded to her selfe (with magnanimity of spirit) to tread allmisfortunes under her feete, commanding her women (whereof shee hadbut three now remaining alive) that they should not disclose whatshe was, except it were in some such place, where manifest signesmight yeeld hope of regaining their liberty. moreover, sheadmonished them stoutly to defend their honour and chastity;affirming, that she had absolutely resolved with her selfe, that neverany other shou enjoy her, but her intended husband: wherein herwomen did much commend her, promising to preserve their reputation,according as shee had commanded.
day by day, were the torments of bajazeth wonderfully augmented, yetstill his kinde offers scornefully refused, and he as farre off fromcompassing his desires, as when he first beganne to moove thematter: wherefore, perceiving that all faire courses served to noeffect, hee resolved to compasse his purpose by craft and subtilty,reserving rigorous extremitie for his finall conclusion. and havingonce observed, that wine was verie pleasing to the lady, she beingnever used to drinke any at all, because (by her countries law) it wasforbidden her: and no meane store having beene lately brought tobajazeth in a barke of geneway: hee resolved to surprize her by meanesthereof, as a cheefe minister of venus, to heate the coolest blood.and seeming now in his outward behaviour, as if hee had given over hisamorous pursuite, and which she strove by all her best endeavours towithstand: one night, after a very majesticke and solemne manner,hee prepared a delicate and sumptuous supper, whereto the lady wasinvited: and hee had given order, that hee who attended on her cup,should serve her with many wines compounded and mingled together;which hee accordingly performed, as being cunning enough in suchoccasions.
alathiella mistrusting no such trechery intended against her, andliking the wines pleasing taste extraordinarily, dranke more thenstoode with her precedent modest resolution, and forgetting all herpassed adversities, became very frolicke and merry: so that seeingsome women dance after the manner observed there in majorica, she alsofell to dauncing according to the alexandrian custome. which whenbajazeth beheld, he imagined the victory to be more then halfewonne, and his hearts desire verie neere the obtaining: plying herstill with wine upon wine, and continuing this revelling the most partof the night.
at the length, the invited guests being all gone, the lady retyredthen to her chamber, attended on by none but bajazeth himselfe, and asfamiliarly as if he had bene one of her women, shee no waycontradicting his bold intrusion, so farre had wine over-gone hersences, and prevailed against all modest bashfulnesse. these wantonembracings, strange to her that had never tasted them before, yetpleasing beyond measure, by reason of his treacherous advantage;afterward drew on many more of the ike carowsing meetings, withoutso much as thought of her passed miseries, or those more honourableand chaste respects, that ever ought to attend on ladies.
now, fortune envying thus their stollen pleasures, and that shee,being the purposed wife of a potent king, should thus become thewanton friend of a much mean man, whose onely glory was her shame;altered the course of their too common pastimes, by preparing afarre greater infelicity for them. this bajazeth had a brother, agedabout five and twenty yeeres, of most compleate person, in the verybeauty of his time, and fresh as the sweetest smelling rose, hebeing named amurath. after he had once seene this ladie (whose fairefeature pleased him beyond all womens else) shee seemed in his sodaineapprehension, both by her outward behaviour and civill apparancie,highly to deserve his verie best opinion, for she was not meanelyentred into his favour. now hee found nothing to his hinderance, inobtaining the heighth of his hearts desire, but onely the strictcustodie and guard, wherein his brother bajazeth kept her: whichraised a cruell conceite in his minde, wherein followed (not longafter) as cruell an effect.
it came to passe, that at the same time; in the port of thecittie, called caffa, there lay then a ship laden with merchandize,being bound thence for smyrna, of which ship two geneway merchants(being brethren) were the patrons and owners, who had givendirection for hoysing the sailes to depart thence when the windeshould serve. with these two genewayes amurath had covenanted, forhimselfe to goe aboord the ship the night ensuing, and the lady in hiscompany. when night was come, having resolved with himselfe what wasto be done: in a disguised habite hee went to the house of bajazeth,who stood not any way doubtfull of him, and with certaine of hismost faithfull confederates (whom he had sworne to the intendedaction) they hid themselves closely in the house. after some part ofthe night was over-past, he knowing the severall lodgings both ofbajazeth and alathiella, slew his brother soundly sleeping; andseizing on the lady, whom he found awake and weeping, threatned tokill her also, if she made any noyse. so, being well furnished withthe greater part of worldly jewels belonging to bajazeth, unheard orundescried by any body, they went presently to the port, and there(without any further delay) amurath and the lady were received intothe ship, but his companions returned backe againe; when the mariners,having their sailes ready set, and the winde aptly fitting for them,lanched forth merrily into the maine.
you may well imagine, that the ladie was extraordinarily afflictedwith greefe for her first misfortune; and now this second chancingso sodainely, must needs offend her in greater manner: but amurath didso kindely comfort her with milde, modest, and manly perswasions, thatall remembrance of bajazeth was quickely forgotten, and shee becameconverted to lovely demeanor, even when fortune prepared a freshmiserie for her, as not satisfied with those whereof shee had tastedalready. the lady being unequalled for beauty (as i said before) herbehaviour also in such exquisit and commendable kinde expressed; thetwo brethren owners of the ship, became so deeply enamored of her,that forgetting all their more serious affaires, they studied by allpossible meanes, to be pleasing and gracious in her eye, yet with sucha carefull carriage, that amurath should neither see, or suspect it.
when the brethren had imparted their loves extreamity each to theother, and plainely perceyved, that though they were equally intheir fiery torments, yet their desires were utterly contrary: theybegan severally to consider, that gaine gotten by mirchandize,admitted an equall and honest division, but this purchase was of adifferent quality, pleading the title of a sole possession, withoutany partner or intruder. fearefull and jealous were they both, leasteither should ayme at the others intention, yet willing enough toshake hands, in ridding amurath out of the way, who onely was thehinderer of their hopes, whereupon they concluded together, that ona day when the ship sayled on very swiftly, and amurath was sittingupon the decke, studiously observing how the billowes combatted eachwith other, and not suspecting any such treason in them towards him:stealing softly behinde him, sodainely they threw him into the sea,the shippe floating on above halfe a leagues distance, before anyperceived his fall into the sea. when the ladie heard thereof, and sawno likely meanes of recovering him againe, she fell to her wontedteares and lamentations: but the two lovers came quickely to comforther, using kinde words and pithy perswasions (albeit she understoodthem not, or at the most very little) to appease the violence of herpassions; and, to speak uprightly, she did not so much emoane thelosse of amurath, as the multiplying of her owne misfortunes, stillone succeeding in the necke of another. after divers long and welldelivered orations, as also very faire and courteous behaviour, theyhad indifferently pacified her complainings: they beganne to discourseand commune with themselves, which of them had most right and title toalathiella, and consequently ought to enjoy her. now that amurathwas gone, each pleaded his priviledge to bee as good as the others,both in the ship, goods, and all advantages else whatsoever happening:which the elder brother absolutely denied, alleadging first hispropriety of birth, a reason sufficient, whereby his younger oughtto give him place: likewise, his right and interest both in the shipand goods, to be more then the others, as being heire to his father,and therefore in justice to be highest preferred. last of all, thathis strength onely threw amurath into the sea, and therefore gavehim the full possession of his prize, no right at all remaining to hisbrother.
from temperate and calme speeches, they fell to frownes and ruderlanguage, which heated their blood in such violent manner, thatforgetting brotherly affection, and all respect of parents or friends,they drew forth their ponyards, stabbing each other so often anddesperately, that before any in the shippe had the power or meanesto part them, both of them being very dangerously wounded, the youngerbrother fell downe dead: the elder being in little better case, byreceiving so many perilous hurts, remained (neverthelesse) living.this unhappy accident displeased the lady very highly, seeing herselfe thus left alone, without the help or counsell of any bodie;and fearing greatly, least the anger of the two brethrens parentsand friends, should now bee laide to her charge, and thereon followseverity of punishment. but the earnest entreaties of the woundedsurviver, and their arrivall at smirna soone after, delivered him fromthe danger of death, gave some ease to her sorrow, and there withhim she went on shore.remaining there with him in a common inne, while he continued inthe chirurgians cure, the fame of her singular and much admired beautywas soone spread abroad throughout all the city: and amongst the rest,to the hearing of the prince of ionia, who lately before (on veryurgent occasions) was come to smyrna. this rare rumour, made himdesirous to see her, and after he had seene her, shee seemed farrefairer in his eye, then common report had noised her to be, andsuddenly grew so enamored of her, that she was the onely idea of hisbest desires. afterward, understanding in what manner shee was broughtthither, he devised how to make her his own, practising all possiblemeanes to accomplish it: which when the wounded brothers parents heardof, they not onely made tender of their willingnesse therein, but alsoimmediately sent her to him: a matter most highly pleasing to theprince, and likewise to the lady her selfe; because she thought now tobe freed from no meane perill, which (otherwise) the wounded merchantsfriends might have inflicted uppon her.
the prince perceiving, that beside her matchlesse beauty, shee hadthe true character of royall behaviour; greeved the more, that hecould not be further informed of what countrey shee was. his opinionbeing so stedfastly grounded, that (lesse then noble) she could notbe, was a motive to set a keener edge on his affection towardes her,yet not to enjoy her as in honoirable and loving complement onely, butas his espoused lady and wife. which appearing to her by apparantdemonstrations, though entercourse of speech wanted to confirme it;remembrance of her so many sad disasters, and being now in a mostnoble and respected condition, her comfort enlarged it selfe with asetled hope, her feares grew free from any more mollestations, and herbeauties became the onely theame and argument of private and publikeconference in all natolia, that (well-neere) there was no otherdiscourse, in any assembly whatsoever.
heereupon the duke of athens, beeing young, goodly, and valiant ofperson as also a neere kinsman to the prince, had a desire to see her;and under colour of visiting his noble kinsman, (as oftentimesbefore he had done) attended with an honourable traine, to smirna hecame, being there most royally welcommed, and bounteously feasted.within some few dayes of his there being, conference passed betweenethem, concerning the rare beauty of the ladie; the duke questioningthe prince, whether shee was of such wonder, as fame had acquaintedthe world withall? whereto the prince replyed; much more (noblekinsman) then can bee spoken of, as your owne eyes shall witnesse,without crediting any words of mine. the duke soliciting the princethereto very earnestly, they both went together to see her; and shehaving before heard of their comming, adorned her selfe the moremajestically, entertaining them with ceremonious demeanor (after hercountries custome) which gave most gracious and unspeakable acception.
at the princes affable motion, shee sate downe betweene them,their delight being beyond expression, to behold her, but abridgedof much more felicitie, because they understood not any part of herlanguage: so that they could have no other conference, but by lookesand outward signes onely; and the more they beheld her, the morethey marvelled at her rare perfections, especially the duke, whohardly credited that shee was a mortall creature. thus not perceyving,what deepe carowses of amorous poyson his eyes dranke downe by themeere sight of her, yet thinking thereby onely to bee satisfied, heelost both himselfe and his best sences, growing in love (beyond allmeasure) with her. when the prince and he were parted from her, andhee was at his owne private amorous- meditations in his chamber, hereputed the prince farre happier then any man else whatsoever, bythe enjoying of such a peerelesse beauty.
after many intricate and distracted cogitations, which molestedhis braines incessantly, regarding more his loves wanton heate, thenreason, kindred, and honourable hospitality; he resolutelydetermined (whatsoever ensued thereupon) to bereave the prince ofhis faire felicity, that none but himselfe might possesse such atreasure, which he esteemed to bee the height of all happinesse. hiscourage being conformable to his bad intent, with all hast it mustbe put in execution; so that equity, justice, and honesty, being quiteabandoned, nothing but subtile stratagems were now his meditations.
on a day, according to a fore-compacted treachery which he hadordered with a gentleman of the princes chamber, who was namedchuriacy, he prepared his horses to be in readinesse, and dispatchedall his affaires else for a sodaine departure. the night following,hee was secretly conveyed by the said churiacy, and a friend of hiswith him (being both armed) into the princes chamber, where he(while the ladie was soundly sleeping) stood at a gazing windowtowards the sea, naked in his shirt, to take the coole ayre, becausethe season was exceeding hot. having formerly enstructed his friendwhat was to be done, very softly they stept to the prince, and runningtheir weapons quite thorow his bodie, immediately they threw him forthof the window.
here you are to observe, that the pallace was seated on the seashore, and verie high, and the window whereat the prince then stoodlooking foorth, was directly over divers houses, which the longcontinuance of time, and incessant beating on by the surges of thesea, had so defaced and ruined them, as seldome they were visited byany person; whereof the duke having knowledge before, was the easierperswaded that the falling of the princes body in so vast a place,could neither bee heard or descryed by any. the duke and hiscompanion, having thus executed what they came for, proceeded yet intheir cunning a little further; casting a strangling cord about thenecke of churiacy, seemed as if they hugged and imbraced him: but drewit with so maine strength, that he never spake word after, and sothrew him downe after the prince.
this done, and plainely perceiving that they were not heard orseene, either by the lady, or any other: the duke tooke a light in hishand, going on to the bed, where the lady lay most sweetelysleeping; whom the more he beheld, the more he admired andcommended: but if in her garments shee appeared so pleasing, whatdid shee now in a bed of such state and majestie? being no way dauntedwith his so late committed sin, but swimming rather in surfet ofjoy, his hands all bloody, and his soule much more ugly; he laidehim downe on the bed by her, bestowing infinite kisses and embraces onher, she supposing him to be the prince all this while, not openingher eyes to bee otherwise resolved. but this was not the delight heaymed at, neither did he thinke it safe for him, to delay time withany longer tarrying there: wherefore, having his agents at hand fitand convenient for the purpose, they surprized her in such sort,that shee could not make any noyse or outcry, and carrying her throughthe same false posterne, whereat themselves had entred, laying herin a princely litter; away they went with all possible speede, nottarrying in any place, untill they were arrived neere athens. butthither he would not bring her, because himselfe was a married man,but rather to a goodly castle of his owne, not distant farre fromthe city; where he caused her to bee kept very secretly (to her nolittle greefe and sorrow) yet attended on and served in mosthonourable manner.
the gentlemen usually attending on the prince, having waited all thenext morning till noone, in expectation of his rising, and hearingno stirring in the chamber, did thrust at the doore, which was butonely closed together, and finding no body there, they presentlyimagined, that he was privately gone to some other place, where(with the ladie, whom he so deerely affected) hee might remaine somefew dayes for his more contentment, and so they rested verilyperswaded. within some few dayes following, while no other doubtcame in question, the princes foole, entering by chance among theruined houses, where lay the dead bodies of the prince and churiacy:tooke hold of the cord about churiacyes necke, and so went alongdragging it after him. the dead body being knowne to many, with nomeane mervaile how he should bee murthered in so vile manner: by giftsand faire perswasions they wonne him to bring them to the placewhere he found it. and there (to the no little greefe of the wholecittie) they found the princes body also, which they caused to beeintered with all the most majesticke pompe that might be.
upon further inquisition, who should commit horrid a deede,perceyving likewise that the duke of athens was not to be found, butwas closely gone: they judged (according to the truth) that he had hishand in this bloody businesse, and had carried away the lady with him.immediately, they elected the princes brother to be their lord andsoveraigne, inciting him to revenge so horrid a wrong, and promisingto assist him with their utmost power. the new chosen prince beingassured afterward, by other more apparant and remarkeable proofes,that his people informed him with nothing but truth: sodainly, andaccording as they had concluded, with the help of neighbors, kindredand frends, collected from divers places; he mustred a good andpowerfull army, marching on towards athens, to make war against theduke.
no sooner heard he of this warlike preparation made against him, buthe likewise levied forces for his owne defence, and to his succourcame many great states: among whom, the emperor of constantinople senthis sonne constantine, attended on by his nephew emanuell, withtroopes of faire and towardly force, who were honoutably welcommed andentertained by the duke, but much more by the dutchesse, becauseshee was their sister in law.
military provision thus proceeding on daily more and more, thedutches making choise of a fit and convenient houre, took these twoprinces with her to a with-drawing chamber; and there in flouds ofteares flowing from her eyes, wringing her hands, and sighingincessantly, she recounted the whole history, occasion of the warre,and how dishonourably the duke dealt with her about this strangewoman, whom hee purposed to keepe in despight of her, as thinking thatshe knew nothing therof, and complaining very earnestly unto them,entreated that for the dukes honour, and her comfort, they wouldgive their best assistance in this case.
the two young lords knew all this matter, before shee thusreported it to them; and therefore, without staying to listen [to] herany longer, but comforting her so wel as they could, with promise oftheir best emploied paines: being informd by her, in what place thelady was so closely kept they took their leave, and parted from her.often they had heard the lady much commended, and her incomparablebeauty highly extolled, yea even by the duke himselfe; which made themthe more desirous to see her: wherfore earnestly they solicited him tolet them have a sight of her, and he (forgetting what happened tothe prince, by shewing her so unadvisedly to him) made them promise togrant their request. causing a very magnificent dinner to be prepared,and in a goodly garden, at the castle where the lady was kept: onthe morrow, attended on by a smal traine, away they rode to dinewith her.
constantine being seated at the table, hee began (as oneconfounded with admiration) to observe her judiciously, affirmingsecretly to his soule that he had never seene so compleat a womanbefore; and allowing it for justice, that the duke or any otherwhosoever, if (to enjoy so rare a beauty) they had committedtreason, or any mischeefe els beside, yet in reason they ought to beheld excused. nor did he bestow so many lookes upon her, but hispraises infinitely surpassed them, as thinking that he could notsufficiently commend her, following the duke step by step inaffection; for being now growne amorous of her, and remembrance of theintended warre utterly abandoned; no other thoughts could comeneerer him but how to bereave the duke of her, yet concealing hislove, and not imparting it to any one.
while his fancies were thus amorously set on fire, the time came,that they must make head against the prince, who already wasmarching with in the dukes dominions: wherfore the duke,constantine, and all the rest, according to a counsel held among them,went to defend certaine of the frontiers, to the end that the princemight passe no further. remaining there divers dayes together,constantine (who could thinke on nothing else but the beautifullady) considered with himself, that while the duke was now so farrefrom her, it was an easie matter to compasse his intent: hereupon, thebetter to colour his present returne to athens, he seemed to besurprized with a sudden extreame sicknesse, in regard whereof (bythe dukes free license, and leaving all his power to his cosenemanuel) forthwith he journyed backe to athens. after someconference had with his sister, about her dishonourable wrongs enduredat his hands onely, by the lady, he solemnly protested, that if shewere so pleased, hee would aide her powerfully in the matter, bytaking her from the place where shee was, and never more afterward, tobe seene in that country any more.
the dutchesse being faithfully perswaded, that he would do thisonely for her sake, and not in any affection he bare to the lady,answered, that it highly pleased her; alwayes provided, that itmight be performed in such sort, as the duke her husband shouldnever understand, that ever she gave any consent thereto; whichconstantine sware unto her by many deepe oaths, whereby she referredall to his owne disposition. constantine heereupon secretly preparedin a readinesse a subtile barke, sending it in an evening, neere tothe garden where the lady resorted; having first informed the peoplewhich were in it, fully what was to be done. afterwards, accompaniedwith some other of his attendants, he went to the palace to thelady, where he was gladly entertained, not onely by such as waytedon her, but also by the lady her selfe.
leading her along by the arme towards the garden, attended on by twoof her servants, and two of his owne; seeming as if he was sent fromthe duke, to conferre with her: they walked alone to a port opening onthe sea, which standing ready open, upon a signe given by him to oneof his complices, the barke was brought close to the shore; and theladie being sodainly seized on, was immediately conveyed into it;and he returning backe to her people, with his sword drawne, said: letno man stirre, or speake a word, except he be willing to loose hislife: for i intend not to rob the duke of his faire friend, but toexpell the shame and dishonor that he hath offered to my sister: noone being so hardy as to returne him any answer. aboord wentconstantine with his consorts, and sitting neere to the lady, whowrung her hands, and wept bitterly; he commaunded the mariners tolaunch forth, flying away on the wings of the winde, till about thebreake of day following, they arrived at melasso. there they tookelanding, and reposed on shore for some few dayes, constantinelabouring to comfort the lady, even as if she had bene his ownesister, shee having good cause to curse her infortunate beauty.
going aboord the barke againe, within few dayes they came tosetalia, and there fearing the reprehension of his father, and leastthe lady should be taken from him; it pleased constantine to makehis stay, as in a place of no meane security. and (as before) aftermuch kinde behaviour used towards the lady, without any meanes inher selfe to redresse the least of all these great extremities, shebecame more milde and affable, for discontentment did not a jot quaileher.
while occurrences passed on in this manner, it fortuned, that osbechthe king of turky (who was in continuall war with the emperour) cameby accident to lajazzo: and hearing there how lasciviously constantinespent his time in setalia, with a lady which he had stolne, beingbut weake and slenderly guarded; in the night with certaine wellprovided ships, his men and he entred the town, and surprized manypeople in their beds, before they knew of their enimies comming,killing such as stood upon their defence against them, (among whom wasconstantine) and burning the whole towne, brought their booty andprisoners aboord their shippes, wherewith they returned backe tolajazzo. being thus come to lajazzo, osbech who was a brave andgallant young man, upon a review of the pillage, found the faire lady,whom he knew to be the beloved of constantine, because shee wasfound lying on his bed. without any further delay, he made choice ofher to be his wife; causing his nuptials to be honourablysolemnized, and many moneths he lived there in great joy with her.
but before occasions grew to this effect, the emperour made aconfederacie with bassano, king of cappadocia, that hee should descendwith his forces, one way upon osbech, and he would assault him withhis power on the other. but he could not so conveniently bring this topasse, because the emperour would not yeeld to bassano, in anyunreasonable matter he demanded. neverthelesse, when hee understoodewhat had happened to his sonne (for whom his greefe was beyond allmeasure) hee graunted the king of cappadociaes request; soliciting himwith all instancy, to be the more speedy in assayling osbech. it wasnot long, before hee heard of this conjuration made against him; andtherefore hee speedily mustered up all his forces, ere he would beencompassed by two such potent kings, and marched on to meete the kingof cappadocia, leaving his ladie and wife (for her safety) at lajazzo,in the custodie of a true and loyall servant of his.
within a short while after, he drew neere the campe belonging to theking of cappadocia, where boldly he gave him battell; chancing thereinto be slaine, his army broken and discomfited, by meanes whereof,the king of cappadocia remaining conquerour, marched on towardeslajazzo, every one yeelding him obeysance all the way as he went. inthe meane space, the servant to osbech, who was named antiochus, andwith whom the faire ladie was left in guard; although hee was aged,yet seeing shee was so extraordinarily beautifull, he fell in lovewith her, forgetting the solemne vowes he had made to his master.one happinesse he had in this case to helpe him, namely, that heunderstood and could speake her language: a matter of no meane comfortto her, who constrainedly had lived divers yeeres together, in thestate of a deafe or dumbe woman, because every where else theyunderstoode her not, nor shee them, but by shewes and signes.
this benefite of familiar conference, beganne to embolden his hopes,elevate his courage, and make him seeme more youthfull in his owneopinion, then any ability of body could speake unto him, or promisehim in the possession of her, who was so farre beyond him, and sounequall to be enjoyed by him; yet to advance his hopes a greatdeale higher, newes came, that osbech was vanquished and slaine, andthat bassano made every where havocke of all: whereon they concludedtogether, not to tarrie there any longer, but storing themselveswith the goods of osbech, secretly they departed thence to rhodes.being : g seated there in some indifferent abiding, it came topasse, that antiochus fell into a deadly sickenesse, to whom came acyprian merchant, one much esteemed by him, as beeing an intimatefriend and kinde acquaintance, and in whom hee reposed no smallconfidence. feeling his sickenesse to encrease more and more uponhim dayly, hee determined, not onely to leave such wealth as hee hadto this merchant, but the faire lady likewise. and calling them bothto his beds side, he spake in this manner.
deere love, and my most worthily respected friend, i perceiveplainly and infallibly, that i am drawing neere unto my end, whichmuch discontenteth me; because my hope was to have lived longer inthis world, for the enjoying of your kinde and most esteemedcompany. yet one thing maketh my death very pleasing and welcome tome; namely, that lying thus in my bed of latest comfort in thislife, i shall expire and finish my course, in the armes of those twopersons, whome i most affected in all this world, as you myever-deerest friend, and you faire lady, whom (since the very firstsight of you) i loved and honoured in my soule. irkesome and veriegreevous it is to me, that (if i dye) i shall leave you here astranger, without the counsaile and helpe of any bodie: and yet muchmore offensive would it become, if i had not such a friend as youheere present, who (i am faithfully perswaded) will have the like careand respect of her (even for my sake) as of my selfe, if time hadallotted my longer tarrying here. and therefore (worthy friend) mostearnestly i desire you, that if i dye, all mine affaires and she mayremaine to your trustie care, as being (by my selfe) absolutelycommended to your providence, and so to dispose both of the one andother, as may best agree with the comfort of my soule. as for you(choice beauty) i humbly entreate, that after my death you would notforget me, to the end, i may make my vaunt in another world, that iwas affected here by the fairest lady that ever nature framed. if ofthese two things you will give mee assurance, i shall depart fromyou with no meane comfort.
the friendly merchant, and likewise the ladie, hearing thesewords, wept both bitterly: and after hee had given over speaking,kindely they comforted him, with promises and solemne vowes, that ifhee dyed, all should be performed which hee had requested. within ashort while after, he departed out of this life, and they gave himverie honourable buriall, according to that country custome. whichbeing done, the merchant dispatching all his affaires at rhodes, wasdesirous to returne home to cyprus, in a carracke of the catelans thenthere being: mooving the ladie in the matter, to understand how sheestoode enclined, because urgent occasions called him thence to cyprus.the lady made answere, that shee was willing to passe thither withhim, hoping for the love hee bare to deceased antiochus, that heewould respect her as his sister. the merchant was willing to giveher any contentment, but yet resolved her, that under the title ofbeing his sister, it would be no warrant of securitie to them both.wherefore, hee rather advised her, to stile him as her husband, and hewould terme her his wife, and so hee should be sure to defend her fromall injuries whatsoever.
being aboord the carrack, they had a cabine and small bedconveniently allowed them, where they slept together, that theymight the better be reputed as man and wife; for, to passeotherwise, would have beene very dangerous to them both. andquestionlesse, their faithfull promise made at rhodes to antiochus,sickenesse on the sea, and mutuall respect they had of each otherscredit, was a constant restraint to all wanton desires, and a motiverather to incite chastitie, then otherwise, and so (i hope) you areperswaded of them. but howsoever, the windes blewe merrily, thecarracke sayled lustily, and (by this time) they are arrived at baffa,where the cyprian merchant dwelt, and where shee continued a longwhile with him, no one knowing otherwise, but that shee was his wifeindeede.now it fortuned, that there arrived also at the same baffa (aboutsome especiall occasions of his) a gentleman whose name was antigonus,well stept into yeeres, and better stored with wisedome then wealth:because by medling in many matters, while hee followed the serviceof the king of cyprus, fortune had beene very adverse to him. thisancient gentleman, passing (on a day) by the house where the lady lay,and the merchant being gone about his bussinesse into armenia: heechanced to see the lady at a window of the house, and because shee wasvery beautifull, he observed her the more advisedly, recollectinghis sences together, that (doubtlesse) he had seene her before, but inwhat place hee could not remember. the lady her selfe likewise, whohad so long time beene fortunes tennis ball, and the terme of her manymiseries drawing now neere an ending: began to conceive (upon the veryfirst sight of antigonus) that she had formerly seene him inalexandria, serving her father in place of great degree. heereupon,a sodaine hope perswaded her, that by the advice and furtherance ofthis gentleman, shee should recover her wonted royall condition: andopportunity now aptly fitting her, by the absence of her pretendedmerchant-husband, shee sent for him, requesting to have a few wordswith him.
when he was come into the house, she bashfully demanded of him, ifhe was not named antigonus of famagosta, because she knew one like himso called? he answered that he was so named: saying moreover, madam methinkes i should know you, but i cannot remember where i have seeneyou, wherefore i would entreat (if it might stand with your goodliking) that my memory might be quickned with better knowledge of you.the lady perceiving him to be the man indeed, weeping incessantly, shethrew her armes about his necke, and soone after asked antigonus(who stood as one confounded with mervaile) if he had never seeneher in alexandria? upon these words, antigonus knew her immediately tobe alathiella, daughter to the great soldane, who was supposed (longsince) to be drowned in the sea: and offering to do her such reverenceas became him, she would not permit him, but desired that he would beeassistant to her, and willed him also to sit downe awhile by her.
a goodly chaire being brought him, in very humble maner hedemanded of her, what had become of her in so long a time, becauseit was verily beleeved throughout all egypt, that she was drowned inthe sea. i would it had bin so, answered the lady, rather then toleade such a life as i have done; and i thinke my father himselfewould wish it so, if ever he should come to the knowledge thereof.with these words the teares rained downe her faire cheekes:wherefore antigonus thus spake unto hir. madam, discomfort not yourselfe before you have occasion; but (if you be so pleased) relate yourpassed accidents to me, and what the course of your life hath bene:perhaps, i shall give you such friendly advice as may stand youinsted, and no way be injurious to you.
fetching a sighe, even as if her heart would have split in sunder,thus she replyed.
ah antigonus, me thinkes when i looke on thee, i seeme to beholdmy royall father, and therefore mooved with the like religious zealeand charitable love, as in duty i owe unto him: i wil make known tothee, what i rather ought to conceale and hide from any person living.i know thee to be honourable, discreete, and truely wise, though iam a fraile, simple, and weake woman, therefore i dare discover tothee, rather then any other that i know, by what strange andunexpected misfortunes i have lived so long obscurely in the world.and if in thy great and grave judgement (after the hearing of mymany miseries) thou canst any way restore me to my former estate, ipray thee do it: but if thou perceive it impossible to be done, asearnestly likewise i entreate thee, never to reveale to any livingperson, that either thou hast seene mee, or heard any speech of me.after these words, the teares still streaming from her faire eyes, sherecounted the whole passage of her rare mishappes, even from hershipwracke in the sea of majorica, untill that very instant houre;speaking them in such harsh manner as they hapned, and not sparing anyjot of them.
antigonus being mooved to much compassion, declared how hee pitiedher by his teares; and having bene silent an indifferent while, asconsidering in this case what was best to be done, thus he began.madam, seeing you have past through such a multitude of misfortunes,yet undiscovered, what and who you are: i will render you asblamelesse to your father, and estate you as fairely in his love, asat the houre when you parted from him, and afterward make you wifeto the king of colchos. shee demanding of him, by what meanes possiblythis could be accomplished, breefely he made it knowne to her, how,and in what manner he would performe it.
to cut off further tedious circumstances, forthwith he returned tofamagosta, and going before the king of the country, thus he spaketo him. sir, you may (if so you will be pleased) in an instant, dome an exceeding honor, who have bene impoverished by your service, andalso a deed of great renowne to your selfe, without any much matter ofexpence and cost. the king demanding how? antigonus thus answered. thefaire daughter of the soldane, so generally reported to be drowned, isarrived at baffa, and to preserve her honor from blemishing, hathsuffered many crosses and calamities: being at this instant in verypoore estate, yet desirous to revisite her father. if you please tosend her home under my conduct, it will be great honour to you, and nomeane benefite to me: which kindnesse will for ever be thankfullyremembred by the soldan.
the king in royall magnificence, replied sodainly, that he washighly pleased with these good tydings; and having sent honorablyfor hir from baffa, with great pompe she was conducted to famagosta,and there most graciously welcommed both by the king and queene,with solemne triumphes, bankets, and revelling, performed in mostmajesticke manner. being questioned by the king and queene, concerningso large a time of strange misfortunes: according as antigonus hadformerly enstructed her, so did she shape the forme of her answers,and satisfied (with honor) all their demands. so, within few daiesafter, upon her earnest and instant request, with an honourable traineof lords and ladies, shee was sent thence, and conducted all the wayby antigonus, untill she came unto the soldans court.
after some few dayes of her reposing there, the soldan wasdesirous to understand, how she could possibly live so long in anykingdome or province whatsoever, and yet no knowledge to be taken ofher? the lady, who perfectly retained by heart, and had all herlessons at her fingers ends, by the warie instruction whichantigonus had given her, answered her father in this manner. sir,about the twentieth day after my departure from you, a very terribleand dreadfull tempest overtooke us, so that in dead time of the night,our ship being split in sunder upon the sands, neere to a place calledvarna, what became of all the men that were aboord, i neither know,nor ever heard of. onely i remember, then when death appeared, and ibeing recovered from death to life, certaine pezants of thecountrey, comming to get what they could finde in the ship sowrackt, i was first (with two of my women) brought and set safely onthe shore.
no sooner were we there, but certaine rude shagge-haird villainesset upon us, carrying away from me both my women, then haling me alongby the haire of my head: neither teares or intercessions could drawany pitty from them. as thus they dragd me into a spacious wood, fourehorsemen on a sodaine came riding by, who seeing how dishonourably thevillaines used me, rescued me from them, and forced them to flight.but the foure horsemen, seeming (in my judgement) to bee persons ofpower and authority, letting them go, came to me; urging sundryquestions to me, which neither i understood, or they mine answeres.after many deliberations held among themselves, setting me upon one oftheir horses, they brought me to a monasterie of religious women,according to the custome of their law: and there, whatsoever theydid or sayde, i know not, but i was most benignely welcommedthither, and honoured of them extraordinarily; where (with them indevotion) i dedicated my selfe to the goddesse of chastity, who ishighly reverenced and regarded among the women of that countrey, andto her religious service they are wholly addicted.
after i had continued some time among them, and learned a littleof their language; they asked me, of whence, and what i was. reasongave me so much understanding, to be fearefull of telling them thetrueth, for feare of expulsion from among them, as an enemy to theirlaw and religion: wherefore i answered (according as necessitie urged)that i was daughter to a gentleman of cyprus who sent me to beemarried in candie; but our fortunes (meaning such as had the charge ofme) fell out quite contrary to our expectation, by losses, shipwracke,and other mischances; adding many matters more beside, onely in regardof feare, and yeelding obediently to observe their customes.
at length, she that was in cheefest preheminence among these women(whom they termed by the name of their ladie abbesse) demaunded ofmee, whether i was willing to abide in that condition of life, or toreturne home againe into, cyprus. i answerd, that i desired nothingmore. but shee, being very carefull of mine honour, would never reposeconfidence in any that came for cyprus, till two honest gentlemen offrance who hapned thither about two moneths since, accompanied withtheir wives, one of them being a neere kinswoman to the ladyabbesse. and she well knowing, that they travelled in pilgrimage tojerusalem, to visite the holy sepulcher, where (as they beleeve)that he whom they held for their god was buried, after the jewes hadput him to death; recommended me to their loving trust, with especiallcharge, for delivering mee to my father in cyprus. what honourablelove and respect i found in the company of those gentlemen and theirwives, during our voyage backe to cyprus, the historie would beovertedious in reporting, neither is it much materiall to our purpose,because your demaund is to another end.
sayling on prosperously in our ship, it was not long before wearrived at baga, where being landed, and not knowing any person,neither what i should say to the gentlemen, who onely were carefullfor delivering me to my father, according as they were charged bythe reverend abbesse: it was the will of heaven doubtlesse (in pittyand compassion of my passed disasters) that i was no sooner come onshore at baffa, but i should there haply meet with antigonus, whom icalled unto in our country language because i would not beunderstood by the gentlemen nor their wives, requesting him toacknowledge me as his daughter. quickly he apprehended mine intention,accomplishing what requested, and (according to his poore power)most bounteously feasted the gentlemen and their wives, conductingme to the king of cyprus, who received me royally, and sent me home toyou with so much honour, as i am no way able to relate. what elseretnaineth to be said, antigonus who hath oft heard the whole story ofmy misfortunes, at better leysure will report.
antigonus then turning to the soldan, saide: my lord, as shee hathoften told me, and by relation both of the gentlemen and theirwives, she hath delivered nothing but truth. onely shee hath forgottensomewhat worth the speaking, as thinking it not fit for her toutter, because indeed it is not so convenient for her. namely, howmuch the gentlemen and their wives (with whom she came) commendedthe rare honesty and integrity of life, as also the unspotted vertuewherein shee lived among those chaste religious women, as theyconstantly (both with teares and solemne protestations) avouched tome, when kindly they resigned their charge to me. of all whichmatters, and many more beside, if i should make discourse to yourexcellencie; this whole day, the night ensuing, and the next daiesfull extendure, are not sufficient to acquaint you withall. let itsuffice then that i have said so much, as (both by the reports, andmine owne understanding) may give you faithfull assurance, to makeyour royall vaunt, of having the fairest, most vertuous, and honestlady to your daughter, of any king or prince whatsoever.
the soldane was joyfull beyond all measure, welcomming both himand the rest in most stately manner, oftentimes entreating the godsvery heartily, that he might live to requite them with equallrecompence, who had so graciously honored his daughter: but aboveall the rest, the king of cyprus, who sent her home so majestically.and having bestowne great gifts on antigonus, within a few dayesafter, hee gave him leave to returne to cyprus: with thankfull favoursto the king as well by letters, as also by ambassadours expresselysent, both from himselfe and his daughter.
when as this businesse was fully finished, the soldane, desiringto accomplish what formerly was intended and begun, namely, that shemight be wife to the king of colchos; hee gave him intelligence of allthat had happened; writing moreover to him, that (if he were sopleased) he wold yet send her in royall manner to him. the king ofcolchos was exceeding joyfull of these glad tydings, and dispatching aworthy traine to fetch her, she was conveyed thither very pompously,and she who had bene imbraced by so many, was received by him as anhonest virgin, living long time after with him in much joy andfelicity. and therefore it hath bene saide as a common proverbe: themouth well kist comes not short of good fortune, but is stillrenewed like the moone.
the second day, the eight novell
whereby all men may plainely understand, that loyalty
faithfully kept to the prince (what perils soever doe ensue)
doth yet neverthelesse renowne a man, and bring him to farre
greater honour
the count d'angiers being falsly accused, was banished out offrance, and left his two children in england in divers places.returning afterward (unknowne) thorow scotland, hee found themadvanced unto great dignitie. then, repayring in the habite of aservitour, into the king of france his armie, and his innocenciemade publiquely knowne, hee was reseated in his former honourabledegree.
the ladies sighed verie often, hearing the variety of wofullmiseries happening to alathiella: but who knoweth, what occasionmooved them to those sighes? perhappes there were some among them, whorather sighed they could not be so often maried as she was, ratherthen for any other compassion they had of her disasters. but leavingthat to their owne construction, they smiled merrily at the lastspeeches of pamphilus: and the queene perceyving the novell to beended, shee fixed her eye upon madame eliza, as signifying thereby,that she was next to succeed in order; which shee joyfullyembracing, spake as followeth. the field is very large and spacious,wherein all this day we have walked, and there is not any one hereso wearied with running the former races, but nimbly would adventureon as many more, so copious are the alterations of fortune, in sadrepetition of her wonderfull changes: and among the infinity of hervarious courses, i must make addition of another, which i trust,will no way discontent you.
when the romaine empire was translated from the french to thegermaines, mighty dissentions grew betweene both the nations,insomuch, that it drew a dismall and a lingering warre. in whichrespect, as well for the safety of his owne kingdome, as to annoyand disturbe his enemies; the king of france and one of his sonnes,having congregated the forces of their owne dominions, as also oftheir friends and confederates, they resolved manfully to encountertheir enemies. but before they would adventure any rash proceeding,they held it as the cheefest part of policy and royall providence, notto leave the state without a chiefe or governour. and having hadgood experience of gualtier, count d'angiers, to be a wise andworthy lord, singularly expert in military discipline and faithfull inall affaires of the kingdome (yet fitter for ease and pleasure, thenlaborious toyle and travalle:) he was elected lieutenant governourin their sted, over the whole kingdom of france, and then they went onin their enterprize.
now began the count to execute the office committed to his trust, byorderly proceeding, and with great discretion, yet not entering intoany businesse, without consent of the queene and her faire daughter inlaw: who although they were left under his care and custodie, yet(notwithstanding) he honoured them as his superiours, and as thedignity of their quality required. here you are to observe, concerningcount gualtier himselfe, that he was a most compleate person, agedlitle above forty yeeres, as affable and singularly conditioned, asany nobleman possibly could be, nor did those times affoord agentleman, that equalled him in all respects. it fortuned, that theking and his sonne being busy in the aforenamed war, the wife and ladyof count gualtier died in the mean while, leaving him onely a sonneand a daughter very yong, and of tender yeeres, which made his ownehome the lesse welcom to him, having lost his deere love, and secondselfe.
heereupon, he resorted to the court of the said ladies the morefrequently, often conferring with them, about the waighty affairesof the kingdome: in which time of so serious interparlance, thekings sonnes wife, threw many affectionate regards upon him, convayingsuch conspiring passions to her heart (in regard of his person andvertues) that her love exceeded all capacity of governement. herdesires out-stepping al compasse of modesty, or the dignity of herprincely condition, throwes off all regard of civill and soberthoughts, and guides her into a labyrinth of wanton imaginations. for,she regards not now the eminency of his high authority, his gravity ofyeares, and those parts that are the true conducts to honour: butlookes upon her owne loose and lascivious appetite, her young,gallant, and over-ready yeelding nature, comparing them with hiswant of a wife, and likely hope thereby of her sooner prevailing;supposing, that nothing could be her hindrance, but onely bashfullshamefastnesse, which she rather chose utterly to forsake and setaside, then to faile of her hot enflarned affection, and therefore shewould needs be the discoverer of her owne disgrace.
upon a day, being alone by her selfe, and the time seemingsuteable to her intention: shee sent for the count, under colour ofsome other important conference with him. the count d'aongiers,whose thoughts were quite contrary to hers: immediately went to her,where they both sitting downe together on a beds side in herchamber, according as formerly shee had plotted her purpose; twice heedemaunded of her, upon what occasion she had thus sent for him. shesitting a long while silent, as if she had no answere to make him,pressed by the violence of her amorous passions, a vermillion tinctureleaping up into her face, yet shame enforcing teares from her eyes,with words broken and halfe confused, at last she began to deliver herminde in this manner.
honourable lord, and my deerely respected friend, being so wise aman as you are, it is no difficult matter for you to know, what afrayle condition is imposed both on men and women; yet (for diversoccasions) much more upon the one, then the other. whereforedesertfully, in the censure of a just and upright judge, a fault ofdivers conditions (in respect of the person) ought not to bee censuredwith one and the same punnishment. beside, who will not say, that aman or woman of poore and meane estate, having no other helpe formaintainance, but laborious travaile of their bodies, shouldworthily receive more sharpe reprehension, in yeelding to amorousdesires, or such passions as are incited by love; then a wealthylady whose living relieth not on her pains or cares, neither wantethany thing that she can wish to have: i dare presume, that you yourselfe will allow this to be equall and just. in which respect, i am ofthe minde, that the fore-named allegations, ought to serve as asufficient excuse, yea, and to the advantage of her who is sopossessed, if the passions of love should over-reach her: alwayesprovided, that shee can pleade in her owne defence, the choice of awise and vertuous friend, answerable to her owne condition andquality, and no way to be taxt with a servile or vile election.
these two speciall observations, allowable in my judgement, andliving now in mee, seizing on my youthfull blood and yeeres, havefound no mean inducement to love, in regard of my husbands fardistance from me, medling in the rude uncivill actions of warre,when he should rather be at home in more sweet imployment. you seesir, that these oratours advance themselves here in your presence,to acquaint you with the extremity of my over-commanding agony: and ifthe same power hath dominion in you, which your discretion(questionlesse) cannot be voide of; then let me entreate such advicefrom you, as may rather helpe, then hinder my hopes. beleeve it thenfor trueth sir, that the long absence of my husband from me, thesolitary condition wherein i am left, il agreeing with the hot bloodrunning in my veines, and the temper of my earnest desires: have soprevailed against my strongest resistances, that not onely so weakea woman as i am, but any man of much more potent might, (living inease and idlenesse as i do) cannot withstand such continuall assaults,having no other helpe then flesh and blood.
nor am i so ignorant, but publike knowledge of such an error in mee,would be reputed a shrewd taxation of honesty: whereas (on the otherside) secret carriage, and heedfull managing such amorous affaires,may passe for currant without any reproach. and let me tel you,noble count, that i repute love highly favourable to mee, by guidingmy judgement with such moderation, to make election of a wise, worthy,and honorable friend, fit to enjoy the grace of a farre greater ladythen i am, and the first letter of his name, is the count d'angiers.for if error have not misled mine eye, as in love no lady can beeasily deceived: for person, perfections, and all parts most to beecommended in a man, the whole realme of france containeth not yourequall. observe beside, how forward fortune sheweth her selfe to usboth in this case; you to bee destitute of a wife, as i am of anhusband; for i account him as dead to me, when he denies me the dutiesbelonging to a wife. wherefore, in regard of the unfained affectioni beare you, and compassion which you ought to have of a royallprincesse, even almost sicke to death for your sake, i earnestlyentreat you, not to deny mee your loving society, but pittying myyouth and fiery affections (never to be quenched but by yourkindnesse) i may enjoy my hearts desire.
as shee uttered these words, the teares streamed aboundantly downeher faire cheekes, preventing her of any further speech: so thatdejecting her head into her bosome, overcome with the predominanceof her passions, she fell upon the counts knee, whereas else sheehad falne uppon the ground. when he, like a loyall and most honourableman, sharpely reprehended her fond and idle love: and when sheewould have embraced him about the necke to have kissed him; herepulsed her roughly from him, protesting upon his honourablereputation, that rather then hee would so wrong his lord andmaister, he would endure a thousand deaths.
the ladie seeing her desire disappointed, and her fond expectationutterly frustrated: grew instantly forgetfull of her intemperate love,and falling into extremity of rage, converted her former gentle andloving speeches, into this harsh and ruder language. villaine (quothshe) shall the longing comforts of my life, be abridged by thy baseand scornefull deniall? shall my destruction be wrought by thy mostcurrish unkindenesse, and all my hoped joyes be defeated in amoment? know slave, that i did not so earnestly desire thy sweeteembracements before, but now as deadly i hate and despise them;which either thy death or banishment shall deerely pay for. nosooner had she thus spoken, but tearing her haire, and renting hergarments in peeces, she ranne about like a distracted woman, cryingout alowd; helpe, helpe, the count d'angiers will forcibly dishonourmee, the lustfull count will violate mine honour.
d'angiers seeing this, and fearing more the malice of theover-credulous court, then either his owne conscience, or anydishonourable act by him committed, beleeving likewise, that herslanderous accusation would be credited, above his true andspotlesse innocency: closely he conveyed himselfe out of the court,making what hast he could, home to his owne house, which being tooweake for warranting his safety upon such pursuite as would be usedagainst him, without any further advice or counsell, he seated his twochildren on horsebacke, himselfe also being but meanly mounted, thusaway thence he went to calice.
upon the clamour and noise of the lady, the courtiers quicklyflocked thither; and, as lies soone winne beleefe in hasty opinions,upon any silly or shallow surmise: so did her accusation passe forcurrant, and the counts advancement being envied by many, made hishonest carriage (in this case) the more suspected. in hast and maddingfury, they ran to the counts houses, to arrest his person, and carryhim to prison: but when they could not finde him, they raced hisgoodly buildings downe to the ground, and used all shamefullviolence to them. now, as ill newes sildome wants a speedymessenger; so, in lesse space then you will imagine, the king anddolphin heard thereof in the campe,-and were therewith so highlyoffended, that the count had a sodaine and severe condemnation, allhis progeny being sentenced with perpetuall exile, and promises ofgreat and bountifull rewards, to such as could bring his body alive ordead.
thus the innocent count, by his overhasty and sodaine flight, madehimselfe guilty of this foule imputation: and arriving at callice withhis children, their poore and homely habites, hid them from beingknowne, and thence they crossed over into england, staying no whereuntill hee came to london. before he would enter into the city, hegave divers good advertisements to his children, but especially twoprecepts above all the rest. first, with patient soules to support thepoore condition, whereto fortune (without any offence in him orthem) had thus dejected them. next, that they should have mostheedfull care, at no time to disclose from whence they came, orwhose children they were, because it extended to the perill of theirlives. his sonne, being named lewes, and now about nine yeares old,his daughter called violenta, and aged seaven yeares, did both observetheir fathers direction, as afterward it did sufficiently appeare. andbecause they might live in the safer securitie, hee thought it for thebest to change their names, calling his sonne perotto, and hisdaughter gianetta, for thus they might best escape unknowne.
being entred into the city, and in the poore estate of beggars, theycraved every bodies mercy and almes. it came to passe, that standingone morning at the cathedrall church doore, a great lady of englandbeing then wife to the lord high marshal, comming forth of the church,espied the count and his children there begging. of him she demandedwhat countrey-man he was? and whether those children were his owne, orno? the count replyed, that he was borne in piccardy, and for anunhappy fact committed by his eldest sonne (a stripling of morehopefull expectation, then proved) hee was enforced, with those histwo other children, to forsake his country. the lady being by naturevery pittifull, looking advisedly on the young girle beganne to growin good liking of her; because (indeede) she was amiable, gentle,and beautifull, whereupon shee saide. honest man, thy daughter hatha pleasing countenance, and (perhaps) her inward disposition mayproove answerable to her outward good parts: if therefore thou canstbee content to leave her with me, i will give her entertainment, andupon her dutifull carriage and behaviour, if she live to such yearesas may require it, i will have her honestly bestowne in marriage. thismotion was very pleasing to the count, who readily declared hiswilling consent thereto, and with the teares trickling downe hischeekes, in thankfull maner he delivered his pretty daughter to thelady.
she being thus happily bestowne, he minded to tarry no longer inlondon; but, in his wonted begging manner, travailing thorough thecountry with his sonne perotto, at length he came into wales: butnot without much weary paine and travell, being never used before,to journey so far on foot. there dwelt another lord, in office ofmarshalship to the king of england, whose power extended over thoseparts: a man of very great authority, keeping a most noble andbountifull house, which they termed the president of wales hiscourt; whereto the count and his son oftentimes resorted, as findingthere good releefe and comfort. on a day, one of the presidentssons, accompanied with divers other gentlemens children, wereperforming certaine youthfull sports, and pastimes, as running,leaping, and such like, wherein perotto presumed to make one amongthem, excelling all the rest in such commendable manner, as none ofthem came any thing nere him. divers times the president had takennotice thereof, and was so well pleased with the lads behaviour,that he enquired of whence he was? answere was made, that he was apoore mans son, that every day came for an almes to his gate.
the president being desirous to make the boy his, the count (whosedayly prayers were to the same purpose) frankly gave his son to thenobleman: albeit naturall and fatherly affection, urged someunwillingnesse to part so with him; yet necessity and discretion,found it best for the benefit of them both. being thus eased of carefor his son and daughter, and they (though in different places) yetunder good and worthy government; the count would continue no longerin england: but, as best hee could procure the meanes, passed overinto ireland, and being arrived at a place called stanford, becameservant to an earle of that country, a gentleman professing armes,on whom he attended as a serving man, and lived a long while in thatestate very painfully.
his daughter violenta, clouded under the borrowed name ofgianetta, dwelling with the lady at london, grew so in yeares, beauty,comelinesse of person, and was so gracefull in the favour of herlord and lady, yea, of every one in the house beside, that it waswonderfull to behold. such as but observed her usuall carriage, andwhat modesty shined clearely in her eyes, reputed her well worthy ofhonourable preferment; in regard, the lady that had received her ofher father, not knowing of whence, or what shee was; but as himselfehad made report, intended to match her in honourable marriage,according as her vertues worthily deserved. but god, the just rewarderof all good endeavours, knowing her to be noble by birth, and(causelesse) to suffer for the sinnes of another; disposed otherwiseof her: and that so worthy a virgin might be no mate for a man ofill conditions, no doubt ordained what was to be done, according tohis owne good pleasure.the noble lady, with whom poore gianetta dwelt, had but one onelysonne by her husband, and he most deerely affected of them both, aswell in regard he was to be their heire, as also for his vertues andcommendable qualities, wherein he excelled many young gentlemen.endued he was with heroycall valour, compleate in all perfections ofperson, and his minde every way answerable to his outward behaviour,exceeding gianetta about sixe yeeres in age. hee perceiving her tobe a faire and comely maiden, grew to affect her so entirely, that allthings else he held contemptible, and nothing pleasing in his eyebut shee. now, in regard her parentage was reputed poore, he kepthis love concealed from his parents, not daring to desire her inmarriage: for loath he was to loose their favour, by disclosing thevehemency of his afflictions, which proved a greater torment to him,then if it had beene openly knowne.
it came to passe, that love over-awed him in such sort, as he fellinto a violent sicknesse, and store of physicions were sent for, tosave him from death, if possibly it might be. their judgementsobserving the course of his sicknesse, yet not reaching to the causeof the disease, made a doubtfull question of his recovery; which wasso displeasing to his parents, that their griefe and sorrow grewbeyond measure. many earnest entreaties they moved to him, to know theoccasion of his sickenesse, whereto he returned no other answere,but heart-breaking sighes, and incessant teares, which drew him moreand more into weakenesse of body.
it chanced on a day, a physicion was brought unto him, being youngin yeeres, but well experienced in his practise: and as hee madetriall of his pulse, gianetta (who by his mothers command, attended onhim very diligently) upon some especiall occasion entred into thechamber, which when the young gentleman perceived, and that sheeneither spake word, nor so much as looked towards him, his heartgrew great in amorous desire, and his pulse did beate beyond thecompasse of ordinary custome; whereof the physicion made goodobservation, to note how long that fit would continue. no sooner wasgianetta gone forth of the chamber, but the pulse immediately gaveover beating, which perswaded the physicion, that some part of thedisease had now discovered it selfe apparantly.
within a while after, pretending to have some speech withgianetta, and holding the gentleman still by the arme, the physicioncaused her to be sent for; and immediately shee came. upon her veryentrance into the chamber, the pulse began to beate againe extreamely,and when shee departed, it presently ceased. now was he thorowlyperswaded, that he had found the true effect of his sicknesse, whentaking the father and mother aside, thus he spake to them. if you bedesirous of your sons health, it consisteth not either in physicion orphysicke, but in the mercy of your faire maide gianetta; formanifest signes have made it knowne to me, and he loveth thedamosell very dearely: yet (for ought i can perceive, the maide dothnot know it:) now if you have respect of his life, you know (in thiscase) what is to be done. the nobleman and his wife hearing this,became somewhat satisfied, because there remained a remedy to preservehis life: but yet it was no meane griefe to them, if it should sosucceede, as they feared, namely, the marriage betweene this theirsonne and gianetta.
the physicion being gone, and they repairing to their sicke sonne,the mother began with him in this manner. sonne, i was alwayesperswaded, that thou wouldest not conceale any secret from me, orthe least part of thy desires; especially, when without enjoying them,thou must remaine in the danger of death. full well art thouassured, or in reason oughtest to be, that there is not any thingfor thy contentment, be it of what quality soever, but it shouldhave beene provided for thee, and in as ample manner as for mineowne selfe. but though thou hast wandred so farre from duty, andhazarded both thy life and ours, it commeth so to passe, that heavenhath beene more mercifull to thee, then thou wouldest be to thy selfe,or us. and to prevent thy dying of this disease, a dreame this nighthath acquainted me with the principall occasion of thy sickenesse,to wit extraordinary affection to a young maiden, in some such placeas thou hast seene her. i tell thee sonne, it is a matter of nodisgrace to love, and why shouldst thou shame to manifest as much,it being so apt and convenient for thy youth? for if i were perswaded,that thou couldst not love, i should make the lesse esteeme of thee.therefore deare sonne, be not dismayed, but freely discover thineaffections. expell those disastrous drouping thoughts, that haveindangered thy life by this long lingering sicknesse. and let thysoule be faithfully assured, that thou canst not require any thingto be done, remaining within the compasse of my power, but i willperforme it; for i love thee as dearely as mine owne life. settherefore aside this nice conceit of shame and feare, revealing thetruth boldly to me, if i may stead thee in thy love; resolving thyselfe unfaignedly, that if my care stretch not to compasse thycontent, account me for the most cruell mother living, and utterlyunworthy of such a sonne.
the young gentleman having heard these protestations made by hismother, was not a little ashamed of his owne follie; butrecollecting his better thoughts together, and knowing in his soule,that no one could better further his hopes, then shee; forgettingall his former feare, he returned her this answere; madam, and mydearely affected mother, nothing hath more occasioned my loves sostrict concealement, but an especiall errour, which i finde by dailyproofe in many, who being growne to yeeres of grave discretion, doenever remember, that they themselves have bin yong. but because hereini find you to be both discreet and wise, i will not onely affirme whatyou have seen in me to be true, but also will confesse, to whom it is:upon condition, that the effect of your promise may follow it,according to the power remaining in you, whereby you onely maysecure my life.
his mother, desirous to bee resolved, whether his confession wouldagree with the physitians words, or no, and reserving anotherintention to her selfe: bad him feare nothing, but freely discover hiswhole desire, and forthwith she doubted not to effect it. thenmadame (quoth hee) the matchlesse beauty, and commendable qualities ofyour maid gianetta, to whom (as yet) i have made no motion, tocommisserate this my languishing extremity, nor acquainted anyliving creature with my love: the concealing of these afflictions tomyselfe, hath brought mee to this desperate condition: and if somemeane bee not wrought, according to your constant promise, for thefull enjoying of my longing desires, assure your selfe (most noblemother) that the date of my life is very short. the lady well knowing,that the time now rather required kindest comfort, then any severeor sharpe reprehension, smiling on him, said: alas deere sonne, wastthou sicke for this? be of good cheare, and when thy strength isbetter restored, then referre the matter to me. the young gentleman,being put in good hope by his mothers promise, began (in short time)to shew apparant signes of well-forwarded amendment, to the mothersgreat joy and comfort, disposing her selfe dayly to proove, how inhonor she might keepe promise with her sonne.
within a short while after, calling gianetta privately to her, ingentle manner, and by the way of pleasant discourse, she demanded ofhir, whither she was provided of a lover, or no. gianetta, being neveracquainted with any such questions, a scarlet dye covering all hermodest countenance, thus replyed. madam, i have no neede of any lover,and very unseemely were it, for so poore a damosell as i am, to haveso much as a thought of lovers, being banished from my friends andkinsfolke, and remaining in service as i do.
if you have none (answered the ladie) wee will bestow one on you,which shall content your minde, and bring you to a more pleasing kindeof life; because it is farre unfit, that so faire a maid as youare., should remaine destitute of a lover. madam, said gianetta,considering with my selfe, that since you received me of my poorefather, you have used me rather like your daughter, then a servant; itbecommeth mee to doe as pleaseth you. notwithstanding, i trust (in theregard of mine owne good and honour) never to use any complaint insuch a case: but if you please to bestow a husband on me, i purpose tolove and honor him onely, and not any other. for, of all theinheritance left me by my progenitors, nothing remaineth to me buthonourable honesty, and that shall be my legacie so long as i live.
these wordes, were of a quite contrary complexion, to those whichthe lady expected from her, and for effecting the promise made untohir sonne: howbeit (like a wise and noble ladie) much she inwardlycommended the maids answers, and said unto her. but tell megianetta, what if my lord the king (who is a gallant youthfull prince,and you so bright a beautie as you are) should take pleasure in yourlove, would ye denie him? sodainly the maide returned this answer:madame, the king perhaps might enforce me, but with my free consent,hee shall never have any thing of me that is not honest. nor did thelady dislike her maides courage and resolution, but breaking of allher further conference, intended shortly to put her project in proofe,saying to her son, that when he was fully recovered, he should haveprivate accesse to gianetta, whom shee doubted not but would betractable enough to him; for she helde it no meane blemish to herhonour, to moove the maide any more in the matter, but let himcompasse it as he could.
farre from the yong gentlemans humour was this answer of his mother,because he aimed not at any dishonourable end: true, faithfull, andhonest love was the sole scope of his intention, foule and loathsomelust he utterly defied; whereupon he fell into sickenesse againe,rather more violently then before. which the lady perceiving, revealedher whole intent to gianetta, and finding her constancie beyond commoncomparison, acquainted her lord with all she had done, and bothconsented (though much against their mindes) to let him enjoy her inhonourable marriage: accounting it better, for preservation of theironely sons life, to match him farre inferiour to his degree, then bydenying h desire, to let him pine and dye for her love.
after great consultation with kindred and friends, the match wasagreed upon, to the no little joy of gianetta, who devoutly returnedinfinite thankes to heaven, for so mercifully respecting herdejected poore estate, after the bitter passage of so many miseries,and never tearming her selfe any otherwise, but the daughter of apoore piccard. soone was the yong gentleman recovered and married,no man alive so well contented as he, and setting downe an absolutedetermination, to lead a loving life with his gianetta.
let us now convert our lookes to wales, to perotto; being leftethere with the other lord marshall, who was the president of thatcountrey. on hee grew in yeeres, choisely respected by his lord,because hee was most comely of person, and forward to all valiantattempts: so that in tourneyes, joustes, and other actions of armes,his like was not to bee found in all the island, being named onelyperotto the valiant piccard, and so was he famed farre and neere. asgod had not forgotten his sister, so in mercy he became as mindefullof him; for, a contagious mortalitie hapning in the country, thegreater part of the people perished thereby, the rest flying thenceinto other partes of the land, whereby the whole province becamedispeopled and desolate.
in the time of this plague and dreadful visitation, the lordpresident, his lady, sonnes, daughters, brothers, nephewes, andkindred dyed, none remaining alive, but one onely daughtermarriageable, a few of the houshold servants, beside perotto, whom(after the sickenesse was more mildly asswaged) with counsell andconsent of the countrey people, the young lady accepted to be herhusband, because hee was a man so worthy and valiant; and of all theinheritance left by her deceased father, she made him lord, and solecommander. within no long while after, the king of englandunderstanding that his president of wales was dead, and fame liberallyrelating the vertues, valour, and good parts of perotto the piccard,hee created him president thereof, and to supply the place of hisdeceased lord. these faire fortunes, within the compasse of so short atime, fell to the two innocent children of the count d'angiers afterthey were left by him as lost and forlorne.
eighteene yeeres were now fully overpast, since the countd'angiers fled from paris, having suffered (in miserable sort) manyhard and lamentable adversities; and seeing himselfe now to begrowne aged, hee was desirous to leave ireland, and to know (if heemight) what was become of both his children. heereupon, perceiving hiswonted forme to be so altered, that such as formerly had conversedmost with him, could now not take any knowledge of him, and feelinghis body (through long labour and exercise endured in service) morelustie then in his idle youthfull yeeres, especially when he leftthe court of france, hee purposed to proceede in his determination.being verie poore and simple in apparrel, he departed from the irishearle his master, with whom he had continued long in service, to noadvantage or advancement, and crossing over into england, travayled tothe place in wales, where he left perotto, and where he found him tobe lord marshall and president of the country, lusty and in goodhealth, a man of goodly feature, and most honorably respected andreverenced of the people.
well may you imagine, that this was no small comfort to the pooreaged countes heart, yet would he not make himselfe knowne to him, orany other about him, but referred his joy to a further enlarging anddiminishing, by sight of the other limbe of his life, his deerelyaffected daughter gianetta, denying rest to his bodie in any place,until such time as he came to london. making there secret enquiryconcerning the ladie with whom hee had left his daughter; heeunderstoode, that a young gentlewoman, named gianetta, was marriedto that ladies onely son, which made a second addition of joy to hissoule, accounting all his passed adversities of no valew, both hischildren being living, and in so high honour.
having found her dwelling, and (like a kinde father) being earnestlydesirous to see her; he dayly resorted nere to the house, where sirroger mandevile (for so was gianettaes husband named) chauncing to seehim, being moved to compassion, because he was both poore and aged:commaunded one of his men, to take him into the house, and to give himsome foode for gods sake, which (accordingly) the servant performed.gianetta had divers children by her husband, the eldest being buteight yeeres of age, yet all of them so faire and comely as couldbe. as the old count sate eating his meate in the hall, the childrencame all about him, embracing, hugging, and making much of him, evenas if nature had truly instructed them, that this was their aged(though poor) grandfather, and hee as lovingly receiving these kilderelations from them, wisely and silently kept all to himselfe, withsighes, teares, and joyes intermixed together. insomuch that thechildren would not part from him though their tutor and mastercalled them often, which being tolde to their mother, shee came foorthof the neere adjoyning parlour, and threatned to beate them, if theywould not doe what their maister commanded them.
then the children began to cry, saying; that they would tarriestil by the good olde man, because he loved them better then theirmaster did; whereat both the lady and the count began to smile. thecount, a poore begger, and not as father to so great a lady, arose,and did her humble reverence, because she was now a noble woman,conceyving wonderfull joy in his soule, to see her so faire and goodlya creature: yet could she take no knowledge of him, age, want, andmisery had so mightily altered him; his head all white, his beardwithout any comly forme, his garments so poore, and his face sowrinkled, leane and meager, that he seemed rather some carter, thena count. and gianetta perceiving that when her children were fetchtaway, they returned againe to the olde man, and would not leave him,she desired their maister to let them alone.while thus the children continued making much of the good olde man,lord andrew mandevile, father to sir roger, came into the hall, asbeing so willed to doe by the childrens schoolemaster. he being ahastie-minded man, and one that ever-despised gianetta before, butmuch more since her marriage to his sonne, angerly said; let themalone with a mischeefe, and so befall them, their best company oughtto bee with beggers, for so they are bred and borne by the mothersside: and therefore it is no mervaile, if like will to like, a beggersbrats to keepe company with beggers. the count hearing thesecontemptible wordes, was not a little greeved thereat; and althoughhis courage was greater then his poore condition would permit him toexpresse; yet, clouding all injuries with noble patience, hangingdowne his head, and shedding many a salt teare, endured this reproach,as hee had done many, both before and after.
but honourable sir roger, perceiving what delight his children tookein the poore mans company; albeit he was offended at his fathers harshwords, by holding his wife in such base respect: yet favoured thepoore count so much the more, and seeing him weepe, did greatlycompassionate his case, saying to the poore man, that if he wouldaccept of his service, he willingly would entertaine him. wheretothe count replyed, that very gladly he would embrace his kindeoffer: but he was capeable of no other service, save onely to be anhorsekeeper, wherein he had imployed the most part of his time.heereupon, more for pleasure and pitty then any necessity of hisservice, he was appointed to the keeping of an horse, which wasonely for his daughters saddle, and daily after he had done hisdiligence about the horse, he did nothing else but play with thechildren. while fortune pleased thus to dally with the poore countd'angiers, and his children, it came to passe, that the king of france(after divers leagues of truces passed betweene him and the germaines)died, and next after him, his son the dolphin was crowned king, and itwas his wife that wrongfully caused the counts banishment. afterexpiration of the last league with the germains, the warres began togrow much more fierce and sharpe, and the king of england, (uponrequest made to him by his new brother of france) sent him veryhonourable supplies of his people, under the conduct of perotto, hislately elected president of wales, and sir roger mandevile, son to hisother lord high marshall; with whom also the poore count went, andcontinued a long while in the campe as a common souldier, where yetlike a valiant gentleman (as indeed he was no lesse) both in adviceand actions; he accomplished many more notable matters, then wasexpected to come from him.
it so fell out, that in the continuance of this warre, the queene offrance fell into a grievous sicknesse, and perceiving her selfe tobe at the point of death, shee became very penitently sorrowfull forall her sinnes, earnestly desiring that shee might be confessed by thearchbishop of roane, who was reputed to be an holy and vercuous man.in the repetition of her other offences; she revealed what great wrongshe had done to the count d'angiers, resting not so satisfied, withdisclosing the whole matter to him alone; but also confessed thesame before many other worthy persons, and of great honour, entreatingthem to worke so with the king, that (if the count were yet living, orany of his children) they might be restored to their former honouragaine.
it was not long after, but the queene left this life, and was mostroyally enterred, when her confession being disclosed to the king,after much sorrow for so injuriously wronging a man of so great valourand honour: proclamation was made throughout the campe, and in manyother parts of france beside, that whosoever could produce the countd'angiers, or any of his children, should richly be rewarded foreach one of them; in regard he was innocent of the foule imputation,by the queenes owne confession, and for his wrongfull exile so long,he should be exalted to his former honour with farre greaterfavours, which the king franckely would bestow upon him. when thecount (who walked up and downe in the habite of a common servitor)heard this proclamation, forth-with hee went to his master sir rogermandevile, requesting his speedy repaire to lord perotto, that beingboth assembled together, he would acquaint them with a serious matter,concerning the late proclamation published by the king. being bythemselves alone in the tent, the count spake in this manner toperotto. sir, s. roger mandevile here, your equall competitor inthis military service, is the husband to your naturall sister,having as yet never received any dowry with her, but her inherentunblemishable vertue and honor. now because she may not stil remaindestitute of a competent dowry: i desire that sir roger, and noneother, may enjoy the royall reward promised by the king. you lordperotto, whose true name is lewes, manifest your selfe to be noblyborne, and sonne to the wrongfull banished count d'angiers: avouchmoreover, that violenta, shadowed under the borrowed name of gianetta,is your owne sister; and deliver me up as your father, the long exiledcount d'angiers. perotto hearing this, beheld him more advisedly,and began to know him: then, the tears flowing abundantly from hiseyes, he fell at his feete, and often embracing him, saide: my deereand noble father! a thousand times more deerely welcome to yoursonne lewes.
sir roger mandevile, hearing first what the count had saide, andseeing what perotto afterward performed; became surprized with suchextraordinary joy and admiration, that he knew not how to carryhimselfe in this case. neverthelesse, giving credite to his words, andbeing somewhat ashamed, that he had not used the count in morerespective manner, and remembring beside, the unkinde language ofhis furious father to him: he kneeled downe, humbly craving pardon,both for his fathers rudenes and his owne, which was courteouslygranted by the count, embracing him lovingly in his armes.
when they had a while discoursed their severall fortunes, sometimein teares, and then againe in joy; perotto and sir roger, would havethe count to be garmented in better manner, but in no wise he wouldsuffer it; for it was his onely desire, that sir roger should beeassured of the promised reward, by presenting him in the kingspresence, and in the homely habit which he did weare, to touch himwith the more sensible shame, for his rash beleefe, and injuriousproceeding. then sir roger mandevile, guiding the count by the hand,and perotto following after, came before the king, offering to presentthe count and his children, if the reward promised in the proclamationmight be performed. the king immediately commanded, that a reward ofinestimable valew should be produced; desiring sir roger upon thesight thereof, to make good his offer, for forthwith presenting thecount and his children. which hee made no longer delay of, but turninghimselfe about, delivered the aged count, by the title of his servant,and presenting perotto next, saide. sir, heere i deliver you thefather and his son, his daughter who is my wife, cannot soconveniently be here now, but shortly, by the permission of heaven,your majesty shall have a sight of her.
when the king heard this, stedfastly he looked on the count; and,notwithstanding his wonderfull alteration, both from his wontedfeature and forme: yet, after he had very seriously viewed him, heknew him perfectly; and the teares trickling downe his cheekespartly with remorsefull shame, and joy also for his so happy recovery,he tooke up the count from kneeling, kissing, and embracing him verykindely, welcomming perotto in the selfe same manner. immediately alsohe gave commaund, that the count should be restored to his honors,apparell, servants, horses, and furniture, answerable to his highestate and calling, which was as speedily performed. moreover, the kingreatly honoured sir roger mandevile, desiring to be made acquaintedwith all their passed fortunes.
when sir roger had received the royall reward, for thus surrenderingthe count and his sonne, the count calling him to him, saide. takethat princely remuneration of my soveraigne lord and king, andcommending me to your unkinde father, tell him that your childrenare no beggars brats, neither basely borne by their mothers side.sir roger returning home with his bountifull reward, soone afterbrought his wife and mother to paris, and so did perotto his wifewhere in great joy and triumph, they continued with while with thenoble count; who had all his goods and honours restored to him, infarre greater measure then ever they were before: his sonnes in lawreturning home with their wives into england, left the count withthe king at paris, where he spent the rest of his dayes in greathonour and felicity.
the second day, the ninth novell
wherein is declared, that by overliberall commending the
chastity of women, it falleth out (oftentimes) to be very
dangerous, especially by the meanes of treacherers who yet
(in the ende) are justly punnished for their treachery
bernardo, a merchant of geneway, being deceived by another merchant,named ambroginolo, lost a great part of his goods. and commandinghis innocent wife to be murthered, she escaped, and (in the habiteof a man) became servant to the soldane. the deceiver being found atlast, shee compassed such meanes, that her husband bernardo cameinto alexandria, and there, after due punnishment inflicted on thefalse deceiver, she resumed the garments againe of a woman, andreturned home with her husband to geneway.
madam eliza having ended her compassionate discourse, which indeedehad moved all the rest to sighing; the queene, who was faire, comelyof stature, and tarrying a very majesticall countenance, smilingmore familarly then the other, spake to them thus. it is verynecessary, that the promise made to dioneus, should carefully be kept,and because now there remaineth none, to report any more novels, butonely he and my selfe: i must first deliver mine, and he (who takes itfor an honour) to be the last in relating his owne, last let him befor his owne deliverance. then pausing a little while, thus shebegan againe. many times among vulgar people, it hath passed as acommon proverbe: that the deceiver is often trampled on, by such as hehath deceived. and this cannot shew it selfe (by any reason) to betrue, except such accidents as awaite on treachery, doe really makea just discovery thereof. and therefore according to the course ofthis day observed, i am the woman that must make good what i havesaide for the approbation of that proverbe: no way (i hope)distastfull to you in the hearing, but advantageable to preserve youfrom any such beguiling.
there was a faire and goodly inne in paris, much frequented bymany great italian merchants, according to such variety of occasionsand businesse, as urged their often resorting thither. one night amongmany other, having had a merry supper together, they began todiscourse on divers matters, and falling from one relation to another;they communed in very friendly manner, concerning their wives, lefteat home in their houses. quoth the first, i cannot well imagine whatmy wife is now doing, but i am able to say for my selfe, that if apretty female should fall into my company: i could easily forget mylove to my wife, and make use of such an advantage offered.
a second replyed; and trust me, i should do no lesse, because i amperswaded, that if my wife be willing to wander, the law is in herowne hand, and i am farre enough from home: dumbe walles blab notales, and offences unknowne are sildome or never called inquestion. a third man unapt in censure, with his former fellowes ofthe jury; and it plainely appeared, that all the rest were of the sameopinion, condemning their wives over-rashly, and alledging, thatwhen husbands strayed so far from home, their wives had wit enoughto make use of their time.
onely one man among them all, named bernardo lomellino, and dwellingin geneway, maintained the contrary; boldly avouching, that by theespeciall favour of fortune, he had a wife so perfectly compleate inall graces and vertues, as any lady in the world possibly could be,and that italy scarsely contained her equall. but, she was goodly ofperson, and yet very young, quicke, quaint, milde, and courteous,and not any thing appertaining to the office of a wife, either fordomesticke affayres, or any other imployment whatsoever, but inwomanhoode shee went beyond all other. no lord, knight, esquire, orgentleman, could bee better served at his table, then himselfe daylywas, with more wisedome, modesty and discretion. after all this, heepraised her for riding, hawking, hunting, fishing, fowling, reading,writing, enditing, and most absolute keeping his bookes of accounts,that neither himselfe, or any other merchant could therein excell her.after infinite other commendations, he came to the former point oftheir argument, concerning the easie falling of women intowantonnesse, maintaining (with a solemne oath) that no womanpossibly could be more chaste and honest then she: in which respect,he was verily perswaded, that if he stayed from her ten years space(yea all his life time) out of his house; yet never would sheefalsifie her faith to him, or be lewdly allured by any other man.
amongst these merchants thus communing together, there was a youngproper man, named ambroginolo of placentia, who began to laugh atthe last prayses which bernardo had used of his wife, and seeming tomake a mockerie thereof, demaunded, if the emperour had given him thispriviledge, above all other married men? bernardo being somewhatoffended, answered: no emperour hath done it, but the especiallblessing of heaven, exceeding all the emperours on the earth in grace,and thereby have received this favour; whereto ambroginolo presentlythus replyed. bernardo, without all question to the contrary, ibeleeve that what thou hast said, is true; but (for ought i canperceive) thou hast slender judgement in the nature of things:because, if thou diddst observe them well, thou couldst not be of sogrosse understanding. for, by comprehending matters in their truekinde and nature, thou wouldst speake of them more correctly then thoudoest. and to the end, thou mayest not imagine, that we who havespoken of our wives, doe thinke any otherwise of them, then as welland honestly as thou canst of thine, nor that any thing else didurge these speeches of them, or falling into this kinde ofdiscourse, but onely by a naturall instinct and admonition, i wilproceede familiarly, a little further with thee, uppon the matteralreadie propounded. i have evermore understoode, that man was themost noble creature, formed by god to live in this world, and woman inthe next degree to him: but man, as generally is beleeved, and as isdiscerned by apparant effects is the most perfect of both. having thenthe most perfection in him, without all doubt, he must be so muchthe more firme and constant. so in like manner, it hath beene, andis universally graunted, that woman is more various and mutable, maybe approved by and the reason thereof may be approved by many naturallcircumstances, which were needlesse now to make any mention of. if aman then be possessed of the greater stability, and yet cannotcontaine himselfe from condiscending, i say not to one thatentreates him, but to desire any other that please him; and beside, tocovet the enjoying of his owne pleasing contentment (a thing notchancing to him once in a moneth, but infinite times in a dayesspace). what can you then conceive of a fraile woman, subject (bynature) to entreaties, flatteries, giftes, perswasions, and a thousandother inticing meanes, which a man (that is affected to her) canuse? doest thou thinke then that she hath any power to containe?assuredly, though thou shouldest rest so resolved, yet cannot i beof the same opinion. for i am sure thou beleevest, and must needesconfesse it, that thy wife is a woman, made of flesh and blood, asother women are: if it be so, she cannot bee without the same desires,and the weaknesse or strength as other women have, to resistnaturall appetites as her owne are. in regard whereof, it is meerelyimpossible (although she be most honest) but she must needs doe thatwhich other women doe: for there is nothing else possible, either tobe denied or affirmed to the contrary, as thou most unadvisedly hastdone.
bernardo answered in this manner. i am a merchant, and nophilosopher, and like a merchant i meane to answer thee. i am not tolearne, that these accidents by thee related, may happen to fooles,who are voide of understanding or shame: but such as are wise, andendued with vertue, have alwayes such a precious esteeme of theirhonour, that they wil containe those principles of constancie, whichmen are meerely carelesse of, and i justifie my wife to be one ofthem. beleeve me bernardo, replyed ambroginolo, if so often as thywives minde is addicted to wanton folly, a badge of scorne shouldarise on thy forehead, to render testimony of hir female frailty, ibeleeve the number of them would be more, then willingly you wouldwish them to be. and among all married men in every degree, thenotes are so secret of their wives imperfections, that the sharpestsight is not able to discerne them: and the wiser sort of men arewilling not to know them; because shame and losse of honour is neverimposed, but in cases evident and apparant.
perswade thy selfe then bernardo, that what women may accomplishin secret, they will rarely faile to doe: or if they abstaine, it isthrough feare and folly. wherefore, hold it for a certaine rule,that that is onely chaste, that never was solicited personally, orif she endured any such suite, either shee answered yea, or no. andalbeit i know this to be true, by many infallible and naturallreasons, yet could i not speak so exactly as i doe, if i had not triedexperimentally, the humours and affections of divers women. yea, andlet me tell thee more bernardo, were i in private company with thywife, howsoever thou presumest to thinke her to be, i should accountit a matter of no impossibility, to finde in her the selfesamefrailty.
bernardoes blood now began to boyle, and patience being a little putdowne by choller, thus he replyed. a combat of words requiresover-long continuance; for i maintaine the matter which thoudeniest, and all this sorts to nothing in the end. but seeing thoupresumest, that all women are so apt and tractable, and thy selfe soconfident of thine owne power: i willingly yeeld (for the betterassurance of my wifes constant loyalty) to have my head smitten off,if thou canst winne her to any such dishonest act, by any meaneswhatsoever thou canst use unto her; which if thou canst not doe,thou shalt onely loose a thousand duckets of gold. now beganambroginolo to be heated with these words, answering thus. bernardo,if i had won the wager, i know not what i should doe with thy head;but if thou be willing to stand upon the proofe, pawne downe fivethousand duckets of gold, (a matter of much lesse value then thy head)against a thousand duckets of mine, granting me a lawfull limitedtime, which i require to be no more then the space of three moneths,after the day of my departing hence. i will stand bound to goe forgeneway, and there winne such kinde consent of thy wife, as shall beto mine owne content. in witnesse whereof, i will bring backe withme such private and especiall tokens, as thou thy selfe shalt confessethat i have not failed. provided, that thou doe first promise upon thyfaith, to absent thy selfe thence during my limitted time, and be nohinderance to me by thy letters, concerning the attempt by meundertaken.
bernardo saide, be it a bargaine, am the man that will make goodmy five thousand duckets; and albeit the other merchants then present,earnestly laboured to breake the wager, knowing great harme must needsensue thereon: yet both the parties were so hot and fiery, as allthe other men spake to no effect, but writings was made, sealed, anddelivered under either of their hands, bernardo remaining at paris,and ambroginolo departing for geneway. there he remained some fewdayes, to learne the streetes name where bernardo dwelt, as also theconditions and qualities of his wife, which scarcely pleased himwhen he heard them; because they were farre beyond her husbandsrelation, and shee reputed to be the onely wonder of women; whereby heplainely perceived, that he had undertaken a very idle enterprise, yetwould he not give it over so, but proceeded therein a little further.
he wrought such meanes, that he came acquainted with a poorewoman, who often frequented bernardoes house, and was greatly infavour with his wife; upon whose poverty he so prevailed, by earnestperswasions, but much more by large gifts of money, that he won her tofurther him in this manner following. a faire and artificiall chest hecaused to be purposely made, wherein himselfe might be aptlycontained, and so conveyed into the house of bernardoes wife, undercolour of a formall excuse; that the poore woman should be absent fromthe city two or three dayes, and shee must keepe it safe till shereturne. the gentlewoman suspecting no guile, but that the chest wasthe receptacle of all the womans wealth; would trust it in no otherroome, then her owne bed-chamber, which was the place whereambroginolo most desired to bee.
being thus conveyed into the chamber, the night going on apace,and the gentlewoman fast asleepe in her bed, a lighted taper stoodburning on the table by her, as in her husbands absence shee ever usedto have: ambroginolo softly opened the chest, according as cunninglyhee had contrived it, and stepping forth in his sockes made of cloath,observed the scituation of the chamber, the paintings, pictures, andbeautifull hangings, with all things else that were remarkable,which perfectly he committed to his memory. going neere to the bed, hesaw her lie there sweetly sleeping, and her young daughter in likemanner by her, she seeming then as compleate and pleasing acreature, as when shee was attired in her best bravery. no especiallnote or marke could hee descrie, whereof he might make crediblereport, but onely a small wart upon her left pappe, with some fewhaires growing thereon, appearing to be as yellow as gold.
sufficient had he seene, and durst presume no further; but takingone of her rings, which lay upon the table, a purse of hers, hangingby on the wall, a light wearing robe of silke, and her girdle, allwhich he put into the chest; and being in himselfe, closed it fastas it was before, so continuing there in the chamber two severallnights, the gentlewoman neither mistrusting or missing any thing.the third day being come, the poore woman, according as formerly wasconcluded, came to have home her chest againe, and brought it safelyinto her owne house; where ambroginolo comming forth of it,satisfied the poore woman to her owne liking, returning (with allthe forenamed things) so fast as conveniently he could to paris.
being arrived there long before his limmitted time, he called themerchants together, who were present at the passed words and wager;avouching before bernardo, that he had won his five thousandduckets, and performed the taske he undertooke. to make good hisprotestation, first he described the forme of the chamber, the curiouspictures hanging about it, in what manner the bed stood, and everycircumstance else beside. next he shewed the severall things, which hebrought away thence with him, affirming that he had received them ofher selfe. bernardo confessed, that his description of the chamber wastrue, and acknowledged moreover, that these other things did belong tohis wife: but (quoth he) this may be gotten, by corrupting someservant of mine, both for intelligence of the chamber, as also ofthe ring, purse, and what else is beside; all which suffice not to winthe wager, without some other more apparant and pregnant token. introth, answered ambroginolo, me thinkes these should serve forsufficient proofes; but seeing thou art so desirous to know more: iplainely tell thee, that faire genevra thy wife, hath a small roundwart upon her left pappe, and some few little golden haires growingthereon.
when bernardo heard these words, they were as so many stabs to hisheart, yea, beyond all compasse of patient sufferance, and by thechanging of his colour, it was noted manifestly, (being unable toutter one word) that ambroginolo had spoken nothing but the truth.within a while after, he saide; gentlemen, that which ambroginolo hathsaide, is very true, wherefore let him come when he will, and he shallbe paide; which accordingly he performed on the very next day, even tothe utmost penny, departing then from paris towards geneway, with amost malitious intention to his wife: being come neere to the city, hewould not enter it, but rode to a country house of his, standing abouttenne miles distant thence. being there arrived, he called aservant, in whom hee reposed especiall trust, sending him to genewaywith two horses, writing to his wife, that he was returned, and sheeshould come thither to see him. but secretly he charged his servant,that so soone as he had brought her to a convenient place, he shouldthere kill her, without any pitty or compassion, and then returne tohim againe.
when the servant was come to geneway, and had delivered his letterand message, genevra gave him most joyfull welcome, and on themorrow morning mounting on horse-backe with the servant, rodemerrily towards the country house; divers things shee discoursed on bythe way, till they descended into a deepe solitary valey, very thicklybeset with high and huge spreading trees, which the servant supposedto be a meete place, for the execution of his masters command.suddenly drawing forth his sword, and holding genevra fast by thearme, he saide; mistresse, quickly commend your soule to god, foryou must die, before you passe any further. genevra seeing the nakedsword, and hearing the words so peremptorily delivered, fearefullyanswered; alas deare friend, mercy for gods sake; and before thou killme, tell me wherein i have offended thee, and why thou must kill me?alas good mistresse replied the servant, you have not any way offendedme, but in what occasion you have displeased your husband, it isutterly unknowne to me: for he hath strictly commanded me, withoutrespect of pitty or compassion, to kill you by the way as i bring you,and if i doe it not, he hath sworne to hang me by the necke. youknow good mistresse, how much i stand obliged to him, and howimpossible it is for me, to contradict any thing that he commandeth.god is my witnesse, that i am truly compassionate of you, and yet(by no meanes) may i let you live.
genevra kneeling before him weeping, wringing her hands, thusreplyed. wilt thou turne monster, and be a murtherer of her that neverwronged thee, to please another man, and on a bare command? god, whotruly knoweth all things, is my faithfull witnesse, that i nevercommitted any offence, whereby to deserve the dislike of my husband,much lesse so harsh a recompence as this is. but flying from mine ownejustification, and appealing to thy manly mercy, thou mayest (wertthou but so well pleased) in a moment satisfie both thy master and me,in such manner as i will make plaine and apparant to thee. take thoumy garments, spare me onely thy doublet, and such a bonnet as isfitting for a man, so returne with my habite to thy master, assuringhim, that the deede is done. and here i sweare to thee, by that lifewhich i enjoy but by thy mercy, i will so strangely disguise my selfe,and wander so far off from these countries, as neither he or thou, norany person belonging to these parts, shall ever heare any tydings ofme.
the servant, who had no great good will to kill her, very easilygrew pittifull, tooke off her upper garments, and gave her a pooreragged doublet, a sillie chapperone, and such small store of moneyas he had, desiring her to forsake that country, and so left her towalke on foote out of the valley. when he came to his maister, and haddelivered him her garments, he assured him, that he had not onelyaccomplished his commaund, but also was most secure from anydiscovery: because he had no sooner done the deede, but foure orfive very ravenous woolves, came presently running to the deadbodie, and gave it buriall in their bellyes. bernardo soone afterreturning to geneway, was much blamed for such unkinde cruelty tohis wife; but his constant avouching of her treason to him(according then to the countries custome) did cleare him from allpursuite of law.
poor genevra was left thus alone and disconsolate, and nightstealing fast upon her, shee went to a silly village neereadjoyning, where (by the meanes of a good olde woman) she got suchprovision as the place afforded, making the doublet fit to her body,and converting her petticoate to a paire of breeches, according to themariners fashion: then cutting her haire, and quaintly disguisedlike unto a saylor, she went to the sea coast. by good fortune, shemet there with a gentleman of cathalogna, whose name was signiorenchararcho, who came on land from his ship, which lay hulling thereabout albagia, to refresh himselfe at a pleasant spring. enchararchotaking her to be a man, as shee appeared no otherwise by her habite;upon some conference passing betweene them, shee was entertaynedinto his service, and being brought aboord the ship, she went underthe name of sicurano da finale. there shee had better apparrellbestowne on her by the gentleman, and her service proved so pleasingand acceptable to him, that hee liked her care and diligence beyondall comparison.
it came to passe within a short while after, that this gentlemanof cathalogna sayled (with some charge of his) into alexandria,carrying thither certaine faulcons, which he presented to thesoldan, who oftentimes welcommed this gentleman to his table, where heobserved the behaviour of sicurano, attending on his maisterstrencher, and therewith was so highly pleased; that hee requested tohave him from the gentleman, who (for his more advancement)willingly parted with his so lately entertained servant. sicuranowas so ready and discreet in his daily services, that he grew in asgreat grace with the soldan, as before hee had done with enchararcho.
at a certaine season in the yeare, as customary order (thereobserved) had formerly beene, in the city of acres which was under thesoldanes subjection, there yeerely met a great assembly ofmerchants, as christians, moores, jewes, sarazens, and many othernations besides, as at a common mart or fayre. and to the end, thatthe merchants (for the better sale of their goods) might be there inthe safer assurance, the soldane used to send thither some of hisordinarie officers, and a strong guard of souldiers beside, todefend them from all injuries and molestation, because he reapedthereby no meane benefit. and who should be now sent about thisbusinesse, but his new elected favourite sicurano, because she wasskilfull and. perfect in the languages.
sicurano being come to acres, as lord and captaine of the guardfor the merchants, and for the safety of their merchandizes, shedischarged her office most commendably, walking with her trainethorough every part of the fayre, where she observed a worthycompany of merchants, sicilians, pisans, genewayes, venetians, andother italians, whom the more willingly she noted, in remembrance ofher native country. at one especiall time among other, chancing into ashop or booth belonging to the venetians, she espied (hanging upwith other costly wares) a purse and a girdle, which sodainly sheremembred to be sometime her owne; whereat she was not a littleabashed in her minde. but without making any such outward shew,courteously she requested to know whose they were, and whether theyshould be sold, or no.
ambroginolo of placentia, was likewise come thither, and great storeof merchandizes hee had brought with him, in a carracke appertainingto the venetians, and hee hearing the captaine of the guard demaundwhose they were, stepped foorth before him, and smiling, answered:that they were his, but not to be solde; yet if hee liked them, gladlyhe would bestow them on him. sicurano seeing him smile, suspectedleast himselfe had (by some unfitting behaviour) beene the occasionthereof: and therefore, with a more setled countenance, hee said:perhaps thou smilest, because i that am a man, professing armes,should question after such womanish toyes. ambroginolo replyed, mylord, pardon mee, i smile not at you, or at your demaund, but at themanner how i came by these things.
sicurano, upon this answere, was ten times more desirous thenbefore, and saide: if fortune favoured thee in friendly maner, bythe obtaining of these things: if it may be spoken, tell mee howthou hadst them. my lord (answered ambroginolo) these things (withmany more besides) were given me by a gentlewoman of geneway, namedmadam genevra, the wife to one bernardo lomellino, in recompence ofone nights lodging with her, and she desired me to keepe them forher sake. now, the maine reason of my smiling, was the remembranceof her husbands folly, in waging five thousand duckets of gold,against one thousand of mine, that i should not obtaine my will of hiswife; which i did, and thereby won the wager. but hee, who betterdeserved to be punished for his folly, then shee, who was but sicke ofall womens disease; returning from paris to geneway, caused her tobe slaine, as afterward it was reported by himselfe.
when sicurano heard this horrible lye, immediately shee conceived,that this was the occasion of her husbands hatred to her, and allthe hard haps which she had since suffered: whereupon, shee reputed itfor more then a mortall sinne, if such a villaine should passe withoutdue punishment. sicurano seemed to like well this report, and grewinto such familiarity with ambroginolo, that (by her perswasions) whenthe fayre was ended, she tooke him higher with her into alexandria,and all his wares along with him, furnishing him with a fit andconvenient shop, where he made great benefite of his merchandizes,trusting all his monies in the captaines custody, because it was thesafest course for him, and so hee continued there with no meanecontentment.
much did shee pitty her husbands perplexity, devising by what goodand warrantable meanes she might make knowne her innocency to him;wherein her place and authority did greatly sted her, and shewrought with divers gallant merchants of geneway that then remained inalexandria, and by vertue of the soldans friendly letters beside, tobring him thither upon an lall occasion. come he did, albeit inespeciall in poore and meane order, which soone was better alteredby her appointment, and he verie honourably (though in private)entertained by divers of her woorthie friends, till time did favourwhat she further intended.
in the expectation of bernardoes arrivall, shee had so prevayledwith ambrogiriolo, that the same tale which he formerly told to her,he delivered againe in presence of the soldan, who seemed to be welpleased with it. but after shee had once seene her husband, sheethought upon her more serious businesse; providing her selfe of an aptopportunity, when shee entreated such favour of the soldan, thatboth the men might bee brought before him; where if ambroginolowould not confesse (without constraint) that which he had made hisvaunt of concerning bernardoes wife, he might be compelled theretoperforce.sicuranoes word was a law with the soldane, so that ambroginolo andbernardo being brought face to face, the soldane with a sterne andangry countenance, in the presence of a most princely assembly,commanded ambroginolo to declare the truth, upon perill of his life,by what meanes he won the wager of the five thousand golden duckets hereceived of bernardo. ambroginolo seeing sicurano there present,upon whose favour he wholly relyed, yet perceiving her lookes likewiseto be as dreadful as the soldans, and hearing her threaten him withmost greevous torments except he revealed the truth indeed; you mayeasily guesse in what condition he stood at that instant.
frownes and fury he beheld on either side, and bernardo standingbefore him, with a world of famous witnesses, to heare his lyeconfounded by his owne confession, and his tongue to denie what it hadbefore so constantly avouched. yet dreaming on no other pain orpenalty, but restoring backe the five thousand duckets of gold, andthe other things by him purloyned, truly he revealed the whole formeof his falshood. then sicurano according as the soldane had formerlycommanded him, turning to bernardo, saide. and thou, upon thesuggestion of this foule lye, what didst thou to thy wife? being(quoth bernardo) overcome with for the losse of my money, and thedishonor i supposed to receive by my wife; i caused a servant ofmine to kill her, and as hee credibly avouched, her body wasdevoured by ravenous wolves in a moment after.
these things being thus spoken and heard, in the presence of thesoldan, and no reason (as yet) made knowne, why the case was soseriously urged, and to what end it would succeede: sicurano spakein this manner to the soldane. my gracious lord, you may plainlyperceive, in what degree that poore gentlewoman might make hervaunt, beeing so well provided, both of a loving friend, and ahusband. such was the friends love, that in an instant, and by awicked lye, hee robbed her both of her renowne and honour, andbereft her also of her husband. and her husband, rather creditinganothers falshoode, then the invincible trueth, whereof he hadfaithfull knowledge, by long and very honorable experience; caused herto be slaine, and made foode for devouring wolves. beside all this,such was the good will and affection borne to that woman both byfriend and husband, that the longest continuer of them in her company,makes them alike in knowledge of her. but because your great wisedomknoweth perfectly what each of them have worthily deserved: if youplease (in your ever-knowne gracious benignity) to permit thepunishment of the deceiver, and pardon the partie so diceyved; iwill procure such meanes, that she shall appeare here in yourpresence, and theirs.
the soldane, being desirous to give sicurano all manner ofsatisfaction, having followed the course so indistriously, bad himto produce the woman, and hee was well contented. whereat bernardostoode much amazed, because he verity beleeved that she was dead.and ambroginolo foreseeing already a preparation for punishment,feared, that the repayment of the money would not now serve his turne:not knowing also, what he should further hope or suspect, if the womanher selfe did personally appeare, which hee imagined would be amiracle. sicurano having thus obtained the soldanes permission,teares, humbling her selfe at his feete, in a moment she lost hermanly voyce and demeanour, as knowing that she was now no longer touse them, but must truly witnesse what she was indeed, and thereforethus spake.
great soldane, i am the miserable and unfortunate genevra, thatfor the space of sixe whole yeeres, have wandered through the world,in the habite of a man, falsely and most maliciously slaundered, bythis villainous traytor ambroginolo, and by this unkinde cruellhusband, betraied to his servant to be slaine, and left to be devouredby savage beasts. afterward, desiring such garments as better fittedfor her, and shewing her breasts, she made it apparant before thesoldane and his assistants, that shee was the very same woman indeede.then turning her selfe to ambroginolo, with more then manly courage,she demanded of him, when, and where it was, that he lay with her,as (villainously) he was not ashamed to make his vaunt? but hee,having alreadie acknowledged the contrarie, being stricken dumbewith shamefull disgrace, was not able to utter one word.
the soldane, who had alwayes reputed sicurano to be a man, havingheard and seene so admirable an accident; was so amazed in hisminde, that many times he was very doubtfull, whether this was adreame, or an absolute relation of trueth. but, after hee had moreseriously considered thereon, and found it to be reall and infallible:with extraordinary gracious praises, he commended the life, constancy,condition and vertues of genevra, whom (til that time) he hadalwayes called sicurano. so committing her to the company ofhonourable ladies, to be changed from her manly habite; he pardonedbernardo her husband (according to her request formerly made) althoughhee had more justly deserved death: which likewise himselfe confessed,and falling at the feet of genevra, desired her (in teares) to forgivehis rash transgression, which most lovingly she did, kissing andembracing him a thousand times.
then the soldane strictly commaunded, that on some high andeminent place of the citie, ambroginolo should be bound and impaled ona stake, having his naked body nointed all over with hony, and neverto bee taken off, untill (of it selfe) it fell in peeces, which,according to the sentence, was presently performed. next, he gaveexpresse charge, that all his mony and goods should be given togenevra, which valued above ten thousand double duckets. forthwith asolemne feast was prepared, wherein much honor was done to bernardo,being the husband of genevra: and to her, as to a most worthy woman,and matchlesse wife, he gave in costly jewels, as also vessels of goldand silver plate, so much as did amount to above ten thousand doubleduckets more.
when the feasting was finished, he caused a ship to be furnished forthem, graunting them license to depart from geneway when they pleased;whither they returned most richly and joyfully, being welcomed homewith great honour, especially madam genevra, whom every one supposedto be dead; and alwayes after, so long as she lived, shee was mostfamous for her manifold vertues. but as for ambroginolo, the veriesame day that hee was impaled on the stake, annointed with honey,and fixed in the place appointed, to his no meane torment: he notonely died, but likewise was devoured to the bare bones, by flies,waspes, and hornets, whereof the countrey notoriously aboundeth. andhis bones, in full forme and fashion, remained strangely blacke fora long time after, knit together by the sinewes; as a witnesse to manythousands of people, which afterward beheld the carkasse of hiswickednesse against so good and vertuous a woman, that had not so muchas a thought of any evill towards him. and thus was the proverbe trulyverified, that shame succeedeth after ugly sinne, and the deceiveris trampled and trod, by such as himselfe hath deceived.
the second day, the tenth novell
wherein olde men are wittily reprehended, that will match
themselves with younger women then is fit for their yeeres,
and insufficient, never considering what may happen to them
pagamino da monaco, a roving pyrate on the seas, carried away thefayre wife of signior ricciardo de chinzica, who understanding whereshee was, went thither; and falling into friendship with pagamino,demanded his wife of him; whereto he yeelde, provided, that sheewould willing goe away with him. she denied to part thence with herhusband, and signior ricciardo dying, she became the wife of pagamino.
every one in this honest and gracious assembly, most highlycommended the novell re-counted by the queene: but especially dioneus,who remained to finish that dayes pleasure with his owne discourse,and after many praises of the former tale were past, thus he began.faire ladies, part of the queenes novell hath made an alteration of myminde, from that which i intended to proceede next withall, andtherfore i will report another. i cannot forget the unmanlyindiscretion of bernardo, but much more the base arrogance ofambroginolo, how justly deserved shame fell upon him, as well it mayhappen to all other, that are so vile in their owne opinions, as heapparantly approved himselfe to be. for, as men wander abroad in theworld, according to their occasions in diversity of countries andobservations of the peoples behaviour; so are their humours asvariously transported. and if they finde women wantonly disposedabroade, the like judgement they give of their wives at home; as ifthey had never knowne their birth and breeding, or made proofe oftheir loyall carriage towards them. wherefore, the tale that i purposeto relate, will likewise condemne all the like kind of men, but moreespecially such as thinke themselves endued with more strength thennature meant to bestow on them, foolishly beleeving, that they cancover their owne defects by fabulous demonstrations, and thinking tofashion other of their owne complexions, that are meerely strangers tosuch grosse follies.know then, that there lived in pisa (some hundred yeeres beforetuscany and liguria embraced the christian faith) a judge betterstored with wisedome and ingenuity, then corporall abilities of thebody, named signior ricciardo di cinzica. he being more then halfeperswaded, that hee could content a woman with such satisfaction ashee daily bestowed on his studies, being a widdower, and extraordinarywealthy, laboured with no meane paines, to enjoy a faire and youthfullwife in marriage: both which qualities hee should much rather haveavoyded, if he could have ministred as good counsell to himselfe, ashe did to others, resorting to him for advice. upon this his amorousand diligent inquisition, it came so to passe, that a worthygentlewoman, called bertolomea, one of the fairest and choisest yongmaids in pisa, whose youth did hardly agree with his age; but muck wasthe motive of this mariage, and no expectation of mutuall contentment.the judge being married, and the bride brought solemnly home to hishouse, we need make no question of brave cheare and banquetting,well furnished by their friends on either side: other matters were nowhammering in the judges head, for thogh he could please all hisclients with counsel, yet now such a suit was commenced againsthimselfe, and in beauties court of continuall requests, that the judgefailing in plea for his own defence, was often nonsuited by lack ofanswer; yet he wanted not good wines, drugs, and all sorts ofrestoratives to comfort the heart, and encrease good blood: but allavailed not.
but well fare a good courage, where performance faileth, hee couldliberally commend his passed joviall daies, and make a promise of asfaire felicities yet to come; because his youth would renew it selfelike to the eagle, and his vigour in as full force as before. butbeside all these ydle allegations, would needs instruct his wife in analmanacke or kalender, which he had (formerly) bought at ravenna,and wherein he plainely shewed her, that there was not one day inthe yeere, but it was dedicated to some saint or other. in reverenceof whom, and for their sakes, he approved by divers arguments andreasons, that a man and his wife ought to abstaine from beddingtogether. adding withall, that those saints dayes had their fastsand feasts, beside the foure seasons of the yeer, the vigils of theapostles, and a thousand other holy dayes, with fridayes,saterdayes, and sundayes, in honor of our lords rest, and al theholy time of lent; as also certain observations of the moone, andinfinit other exceptions beside; thinking perhaps, that it was asconvenient for men to refraine from their wives conversation, as hedid often time from sitting in the court. these were his daylydocuments to his young wife, wherewith (poore soule) she became sotyred, as nothing could be more irksom to her, and very careful hewas, lest any other should teach her what belonged to working daies,because he would have her know none but holy daies. it came topasse, that the season waxing extremely hot, signior ricciardo wouldgo to recreate himselfe at his house in the country, neere to theblacke mountaine, where for his faire wives more contentment, hecontinued divers daies together. and for her further recreation, hegave order to have a day of fishing, he going aboord a small pinnaceamong the fishers, and she in another, consorted with divers othergentlewomen, in whose company she was very well pleased. delightmade them launch further into the sea, then either the judge waswilling they should have done, or agreed with their owne safety. forsodainly a galliot came upon them, wherein was one pagamino a famouspyrate, who espying the two pinnaces, made presently to them, andseized on that wherein the women were. when he beheld there so faire ayoung woman, he coveted after no other purchase; but mounting her intohis galliot, in the sight of signior ricciardo, who by this time wasfearefully landed, he carried her away with him. when signior judgehad seene this theft (he being so jealous of his wife, as scarselyhe would let the ayre breathe on her) it were needlesse to knowwhether he was offended, or no. he made complaint at pisa, and inother places beside, what injurie he had sustained by those pyrates,in carrying away his wife from him: but all in vaine, he neither (asyet) knew the man, nor what was become of him. pagamino perceivingwhat a beautifull woman shee was, made the more precious esteeme ofhis purchase, and being himselfe a batchelor, intended to keepe her ashis owne, comforting her with kinde and pleasing speeches, not usingany ill demeanor to her, because she wept and lamented greevously. butwhen night came, her husbands kalender falling from her girdle, andall the fasts and feasts quite out of her remembrance, she receivedsuch curtesies from pagamino, that before they could arrive at monaco,the judge and his law cases were almost out of memory; such was hisaffable behaviour to her, and she began to converse with him in morefriendly manner, and he entreated her as honourably, as if she had binhis espoused wife.
within a short while after, report had acquainted the judge, whereand how his wife was kept from him; whereupon hee determined, not tosend, but rather to go himselfe in person, and to redeeme her from thepyrate, with what summes of money he should demand. by sea he passedto monaco, where he saw his wife, and she him, as (soone after) sheemade known to pagamino. the next morning, signior ricciardo meetingwith pagamino, made meanes to be acquainted with bim, and within lessethen an houres space, they grew into familiar conference; pagamino yetpretending not to know him, but expected what issue this talke wouldsort to. when time served, the judge discoursed the occasion of hiscomming thither, desiring him to demand what ransome he pleased, andthat he might have his wife home with him. whereto pagamino answered.
my lord judge, you are welcome hither, and to answer you breefelyvery true it is, that i have a yong gentlewoman in my house, whom ineither know to be your wife, or any other mans else whatsoever: for iam ignorant both of you and her, albeit she hath remained a while herewith me. if you be her husband, as you seeme to avouch, i will bringher to you, for you appeare to be a worthy gentleman, and(questionlesse) she cannot chuse but know you perfectly. if she doconfirme that which you have saide, and be willing to depart hencewith you: i shal rest well satisfied, and will have no otherrecompence for her ransome (in regard of your grave and reverendyeeres) but what your selfe shall please to give me. but if it fallout other then you have affirmed, you shal offer me great wrong, inseeking to get her from me; because i am a young man, and can aswell maintaine so faire a wife as you, or any man else that i know.beleeve it certainly, replyed the judge, that she is my wife, and ifyou please to bring me where she is, you shall soone perceive it:for she will presently cast her armes about my necke, and i durstadventure the utter losse of her, if she deny to do it in yourpresence. come on then, saide pagamino, and let us delay the time nolonger.
when they were entred into pagaminos house, and sat downe in thehall, he caused her to be called, and she (being readily preparedfor the purpose), came forth of her chamber before them both, wherefriendly they sate conversing together; never uttering any word untosignieur ricciardo, or knowing him from any other stranger, thatpagamino might bring into the house with him. which when my lord thejudge beheld, (who expected to finde a farre more gracious welcome) hestoode as a man amazed, saying to himselfe. perhaps theextraordinary greefe and melancholly suffered by me since the timeof her losse, hath so altred my wonted complexion, that shee is notable to take knowledge of me. wherefore, going neerer to her, hesaide: faire love, deerely have i bought your going on fishing,because never man felt the like afflictions as i have done since theday when i lost you: but by this your uncivil silence, you seeme as ifyou did not know me. why deerest love, seest thou not that i am thyhusband ricciardo, who am come to pay what ransome this gentlemanshall demaund, even in the house where now we are, so to convey theehome againe, upon his kind promise of thy deliverance, after thepayment of thy ransome?
bertolomea turning towards him, and seeming as if shee smiled to herselfe, thus answered. sir, speake you to me? advise your selfe well,least you mistake me for some other, for mine owne part, i never sawyou till now. how now quoth ricciardo? consider better what you say,looke more circumspectly on me, and then you will remember, that iam your loving husband, and my name is ricciardo di cinzica. youmust pardon me sir, replyed bertolomea, i know it not so fitting for amodest; woman to stand gazing in the faces of men: and let me lookeuppon you never so often, certaine i am, that (till this instant) ihave not seene you. my lord judge conceived in his minde, that thusshe denied all knowledge of him, as standing in feare of pagamino, andwould not confesse him in his presence. wherefore hee entreated ofpagamino, to affoord him so much favour, that he might speake alonewith her in her chamber. pagamino answered, that he was well contentedtherewith, provided, that he should not kisse her against her will.then he requested bartolomea, to goe with him alone into herchamber, there to heare what he could say, and to answere him asshee found occasion. when they were come into the chamber, and nonethere present but he and shee, signior ricciardo began in this manner.heart of my heart, life of my life, the sweetest hope that i have inthis world; wilt thou not know thine owne ricciardo, who loveth theemore then he doth himselfe? why art thou so strange? am i sodisfigured, that thou knowest me not? behold me with a more pleasingeye, i pray thee.
bartolomea smiled to her self and without suffering him to proceedany further in speech, returned him this answere. i would have youto understand sir, that my memory is not so oblivious, but i knowyou to be signior ricciardo di cinzica, and my husband by name ortitle, but during the time that i was with you, it very ill appearedthat you had any knowledge of me. for if you had bene so wise andconsiderate, as (in your own judgement) the world reputed you to be,you could not be voide of so much apprehension, but did apparantlyperceive, that i was yong, fresh, and cheerefully disposed; and so (byconsequent) meet to know matters requisite for such young women,beside allowance of food and garments, though bashfulnesse and modestyforbid to utter it. but if studying the lawes were more welcome to youthen a wife, you ought not to have maried, and you loose the worthyreputation of a judge, when you fall from that venerable profession,and make your selfe a common proclaimer of feasts and fasting dayes,lenten seasons, vigils, and solemnities due to saints, which prohibitethe houshold conversation of husbands and wives.
here am i now with a worthy gentleman, that entertaineth me withvery honourable respect, and here i live in this chamber, not somuch as hearing of any feasts or fasting dayes; for, neither fridaies,saturdaies, vigils of saints, or any lingering lent, enter at thisdoore: but heere is honest and civill conversation, better agreeingwith a youthfull disposition, then those harsh documents wherewith yoututord me. wherefore my purpose is to continue here with him, as beinga place sutable to my minde and youth, referring feasts, vigils, andfasting daies, to a more mature and stayed time of age, when thebody is better able to endure them, and the mind may be prepared forsuch ghostly meditations: depart therefore at your owne pleasure,and make much of your calender, without enjoying any company ofmine, for you heare my resolved determination.
the judge hearing these words, was overcome with exceeding griefe,and when she was silent, thus he began. alas deare love, what ananswere is this? hast thou no regard of thine owne honor, thy parents,and friends? canst thou rather affect to abide here, for the pleasuresof this man, and so sin capitolly, then to live at pisa in the stateof my wife? consider deare heart, when this man shall waxe weary ofthee, to thy shame and his owne disgrace, he will reject thee. imust and shall love thee for ever, and when i dye, i leave thee ladyand commandresse of all that is mine. can an inordinate appetite,cause thee to be carelesse of thine honour, and of him that loves theeas his owne life? alas, my fairest hope, say no more so, but returnehome with me, and now that i am acquainted with thy inclination; iwill endeavour heereafter to give thee better contentment. wherefore(deare heart) doe not denie me, but change thy minde, and goe with me,for i never saw merry day since i lost thee.sir (quoth she) i desire no body to have care of mine honour,beside my selfe, because it cannot be here abused. and as for myparents, what respect had they of me, when they made me your wife?if then they could be so carelesse of mee, what reason have i toregard them now? and whereas you taxe me, that i cannot live herewithout capitall sin; farre is the thought thereof from me: for,here i am regarded as the wife of pagamino, but at pisa, you reputedme not worthy your society: because, by the point of the moone, andthe quadratures of geometrie; the planets held conjunction betweeneyou and me, whereas here i am subject to no such constellations. yousay beside, that hereafter you will strive to give me bettercontentment then you have done; surely, in mine opinion it is no waypossible, because our complexions are so farre different, as yce isfrom fire, or gold from drosse. as for your allegation, of thisgentlemans rejecting me, when his humour is satisfied; should it proveto be so (as it is the least part of my feare) what fortune soevershall betide me, never will i make any meanes to you, what miseries ormisadventures may happen to me; but the world will affoord me oneresting place or other, and more to my contentment, then if i werewith you. therefore i tell you once againe, to live secured from alloffence to holy saints, and not to injure their feasts, fasts,vigills, and other ceremonious seasons: here is my demourance, andfrom hence i purpose not to part.
our judge was now in a wofull perplexity, and confessing hisfolly, in marying a wife so young, and far unfit for his age andabilitie: being halfe desperate, sad and displeased, he came forthof the chamber, using divers speeches to pagamino, whereof he madelittle or no account at all: and in the end, without any othersuccesse, left his wife there, and returned home to pisa. therefurther afflictions fell upon him, because the people began toscorne him, demanding dayly of him, what was become of his gallantyoung wife, making hornes, with ridiculous pointings at him: wherebyhis sences became distracted, so that he ran raving about thestreetes, and afterward died in very miserable manner. which newescame no sooner to the eare of pagamino, but, in the honourableaffection hee bare to bertolomea, he maried her, with great solemnity;banishing all fasts, vigils, and lents from his house, and living withher in much felicity. wherfore (faire ladies) i am of opinion, thatbernardo of geneway, in his disputation with ambroginolo; might haveshewne himselfe a great deale wiser, and sparing his rash proceedingwith his wife.
this tale was so merrily entertained among the whole company, thateach one smiling upon another, with one consent commended dioneus,maintaining that he spake nothing but the truth, and condemningbernardo for his cruelty. upon a generall silence commanded, the queenperceiving that the time was now very farre spent, and every one haddelivered their severall novels, which likewise gave a period to herroyalty: she gave the crowne to madam neiphila, pleasantly speaking toher in this order. heereafter, the government of these few people iscommitted to your trust and care, for with the day concludeth mydominion. madam neiphila, blushing; at the honor done unto her, hercheekes appeared of a vermillion tincture, her eyes glittering withgracefull desires, and sparkeling like the morning starre. and afterthe modest murmure of the assistants was ceased, and her courage inchearfull manner setled, seating her selfe higher then she did before,thus she spake.
seeing it is so, that you have elected me your queene, to variesomewhat from the course observed by them that went before me, whosegovernement you have all so much commended: by approbation of yourcounsell, i am desirous to speake my mind, concerning what i wold haveto be next followed. it is not unknowne to you all, that to morrowshal be friday, and saturday the next day following, which are daiessomewhat molestuous to the most part of men, for preparation oftheir weekly food and sustenance. moreover, friday ought to bereverendly respected, in remembrance of him, who died to give us life,and endured his bitter passion, as on that day; which makes me to holdit fit and expedient, that wee should mind more weight), matters,and rather attend our prayers and devotions then the repetition oftales or novels. now concerning saturday, it hath bin a customeobserved among women, to bath and wash themselves from suchimmundicities as the former weekes toile hath imposed on them. beside,it is a day of fasting, in honour of the ensuing sabbath, whereon nolabor may be done, but the observation of holy exercises.
by that which hath bin saide, you may easily conceive, that thecourse which we have hitherto continued, cannot bee prosecuted inone and the same manner: where. fore, i would advise and do hold it anaction wel performed by us, to cease for these few dayes, fromrecounting any other novels. and because we have remained here fouredaies already, except we would allow the enlarging of our company,with some other friends that may resort unto us: i thinke it necessaryto remove from hence, and take our pleasure in another place, which isalready by me determined. when we shalbe there assembled, and haveslept on the discourses formerly delivered, let our next argument bestill the mutabilities of fortune, but especially to concerne suchpersons, as by their wit and ingenuity, industriously have attained tosome matter earnestly desired, or else recovered againe, after thelosse. heereon let us severally study and premeditate, that thehearers may receive benefit thereby, with the comfortablemaintenance of our harmelesse recreations; the priviledge of dioneusalwayes reserved to himselfe.
every one commended the queens deliberation, concluding that itshold be accordingly prosecuted: and thereupon, the master of thehoushold was called, to give him order for that evenings tableservice, and what else concerned the time of the queenes royalty,wherein he was sufficiently instructed: which being done, thecompany arose, licensing every one to doe what they listed. the ladiesand gentlemen walked to the garden, and having sported themselvesthere a while; when the houre of supper came, they sate downe, andfared very daintily. being risen from the table, according to thequeenes command, madam aemilia led the dance, and the ditty following,was sung by madam pampinea, being answered by all the rest, as achorus.
the song
and if not i, what lady else can sing,
of those delights, which kind contentment bring?
come, come, sweet love, the cause of my chiefe good,
of all my hopes, the firme and full effect;
sing wee together, but in no sad mood,
of sighes or teares, which joy doth countercheck:
stolne pleasures are delightfull in the taste,
but yet loves fire is oftentimes too fierce;
consuming comfort with ore-speedy haste,
which into gentle hearts too far doth pierce.
and if not i, etc.
the first day that i felt this fiery heate,
so sweete a passion did possesse my soule,
that though i found the torment sharp, and great;
yet still me thought t'was but a sweete controule.
nor could i count it rude, or rigorous,
taking my wound from such a piercing eye:
as made the paine most pleasing, gracious,
that i desire in such assaults to die.
and if not i, etc.
grant then great god of love, that i may still
enjoy the benefit of my desire;
and honour her with all my deepest skill,
that first enflam'd my heart with holy fire.
to her my bondage is free liberty,
my sicknesse health, my tortures sweet repose;
say shee the word, in full felicity
all my extreames joyne in an happy close.
then if not i, what lover else can sing,
of those delights which kind contentment bring?
after this song was ended, they sung divers other beside, and havinggreat variety of instruments' they played to them as many pleasingdances. but the queene considering that the meete houre for rest wascome, with their lighted torches before them, they all repaired totheir chambers; sparing the other dayes next succeeding, for thosereasons by the queene alledged, and spending the sunday in solemnedevotion.
the induction to the third day
upon which day, all matters to be discoursed on, doe passe
under the regiment of madam neiphila: concerning such persons
as (by their wit and industry) have attained to their long
wished desires, or recovered something, supposed to be lost
the morning put on a vermillion countenance and made the sunne torise blushing red, when the queene (and all the faire company) werecome abroad forth of their chambers; the seneshall or great masterof the houshold, having (long before); sent all things necessary tothe place of their next intended meeting. and the people whichprepared there every needfull matter, suddainely when they saw thequeene was setting forward, charged all the rest of their followers,as if it had beene prepatation for a campe; to make hast away with thecarriages, the rest of the familie remaining behind, to attend uponthe ladies and gentlemen.
with a milde, majesticke, and gentle pace, the queene rode on, beingfollowed by the other ladies, and the three young gentlemen, takingtheir way towards the west; conducted by the musicall notes ofsweete singing nightingales, and infinite other pretty birds beside,riding in a tract not much frequented, but richly abounding with fairehearbes and flowres, which by reason of the sunnes high mounting,beganne to open their bosome.
but, after the dayes warmth was more mildely qualified, and everyone had made benefit of their best content: they went (by order sentfrom the queene) into the meadow where the fountaine stood, andbeing set about it, as they used to do in telling their tales (theargument appointed by the queene being propounded) the first thathad the charge imposed, was philostratus, who began in this manner.
the third day, the first novell
wherein is declared, that virginity is very hardly to be
kept in all places
massetto di lamporechio, by counterfetting himselfe to be dumbe,became a gardiner in a monastery of nunnes, where he had familiarconversation with them all.
most worthy ladies, there wants no store of men and women, thatare so simple, as to credit for a certainty, that so soon as a yongvirgin hath the veile put on hir head, and the black cowle given tocover withall, she is no longer a woman, nor more sensible of feminineaffections, then as if in turning nun, shee became converted to astone. and if (perchance) they heard some matters, contrary to theirformer perswasion; then they grow so furiously offended, as if one hadcommitted a most foule and enormous sinne, directly against the courseof nature. and the torrent of this opinion burries them on soviolently, that they wil admit no leisure to consider, how (in sucha scope of liberty) they have power to doe what they list, yeabeyond all meanes of sufficient satisfying, never remembring howpotent the priviledge of idlenes is, especially when it is backt bysolitude. in like manner, there are other people now, who verilybeleeve, that the spade and pickaxe, grosse feeding and labour, doquench al sensual and fleshly concupiscence, yea, in such as tilland husband the ground, by making them dull, blockish, and (almost)meere senslesse of understanding. but i will approve (according as thequeene hath commanded me, and within the compasse of her direction) bya short and pleasant tale; how greatly they are abused by errour, thatbuild upon so weake a foundation.
not farre from alexandria, there was a great and goodlymonasterie, belonging to the lord of those parts, who is termed theadmirall. and therein, under the care and trust of one woman, diversvirgins were kept as recluses, or nuns, vowed to chastity of life; outof whose number, the soldan of babylon (under whom they lived insubjection) at every three yeers end, had usually three of thesevirgins sent him. at the time wherof i am now to speake, thereremained in the monastery, no more but eight religious sisters only,beside the lady abbesse, and an honest poor man, who was a gardiner,and kept the garden in commendable order.
his wages being small, and he not well contented therewith, wouldserve there no longer: but making his accounts even, with the factotumor bayliffe belonging to the house, returned thence to the villageof lamporechio, being a native of the place. among many other thatgave him welcom home, was a yong hebrew pezant of the country, sturdy,strong and yet comely of person, being named masset. but because hewas born not farre off from lamporechio, and had there bin broughtup all his yonger dayes, his name of masset (according to their vulgarspeech) was turnec to massetto, and therefore he was usually calledand knowne by the name of massetto of lamporechio.
massetto, falling in talke with the honest poore man, whose name waslurco, demanded of him what services hee had done in the monasterie,having continued there so long a time? quoth lurco, i laboured inthe garden, which is very faire and great; then i went to the forestto fetch home wood, and cleft it for their chamber fuell, drawing upall theyr water beside, with many other toilsome services else: butthe allowance of my wages was so little, as it would not pay for theshoes i wore. and that which was worst of all, they being all women, ithinke the divel dwels among g them, for a man cannot doe any thing toplease them. when i have bene busie at my worke in the garden, onewould come and say, put this heere, put that there; and others wouldtake the dibble out of my hand, telling me, that i did not performeany thing well, making me so weary of their continuall trifling, asi have lefte all busines, given over the garden, and what for onemollestation, as also many other; i intended to tarry no longer there,but came away, as thou seest. and yet the factotum desired me at mydeparting, that if i knew any one who would undertake the aforesaidlabours, i should send him thither, as (indeed) i promised to do:but let mee fall sicke and dye, before i helpe to send them any.
when massetto had heard the words of lurco, hee was so desirous todwell among the nunnes, that nothing else now hammered in his head:for he meant more subtilly than poore lurco did, and made no doubtto please them sufficiently. then considering with himselfe, howbest he might bring his intent to effect; which appeared not easily tobee done. he could question no further therein with lurco, but onelydemaunded other matter of him, saying: introth thou didst welllurco, to come away from so tedious a dwelling, had he need to be morethen a man that is to live with such women? it were better for himto dwell among so many divels, because they understand not the tenthpart that womens wily wits can dive into.
after their conference was ended, massetto began to beate hisbraines how he might compasse to dwell among them, and knowing that hecould wel enough performe all the labours whereof lurco had mademention, he cared not for any losse he should sustaine thereby, butonely stood in doubt of his entertainment, because he was too yong andsprightly. having pondered on many imaginations, he said tohimselfe. the place is farre enough distant hence, and none therecan take knowledge of mee; if i have wit sufficient, cleanely tomake them beleeve that i am dumbe, then (questionles) i shal bereceived. and resolving to prosecute this determination, he tooke aspade on his shoulder, and without revealing to any body whether heewent, in the disguise of a poore labouring countryman, he travelled tothe monastery.
when he was there arrived, he found the great gate open, andentering in boldly, it was his good hap to espy the fac-totum in thecourt, according as lurco had given description of him. makingsignes before him, as if he were both dumbe and deafe; hemanifested, that he craved an almes for gods sake, making shewesbeside, that if need required, he could cleave wood, or doe anyreasonable kinde of service. the factotum gladly gave him food, andafterward shewed him divers knotty logs of wood, which the weakestrength of lurco had left uncloven; but this fellow being more activeand lusty, quickly rent them all to pieces. now it so fell out, thatthe fac-totum must needs go to the forrest, and tooke massetto alongwith him thither: where causing him to fell divers trees, by signes hebad him to the two asses therewith, which commonly carried home allthe wood, and so drive them to the monasterie before him, whichmassetto knew well enough how to do, and performed it veryeffectually.
many other servile offices were there to bee done, which causedthe fac-totum to make use of his paines divers other dayes beside;in which time, the lady abbesse chancing to see him, demanded of thefactotum what he was? madani (quoth hee) a poore labouring man, who isboth deafe and dumbe, hither he came to crave an almes the otherday, the which in charity i could do no lesse but give him; for which,hee hath done many honest services about the house. it seemesbeside, that hee hath pretty skill in gardening, so that if i canperswade him to continue here, i make no question of his ableservices: for the old silly man is gon, and we have need of such astout fellow, to do the busines belonging to the monastery, and onefitter for the turne, comes sildome hither. moreover, in regard of hisdouble imperfections, the sisters can sustaine no impeachment byhim. whereto the abbesse answered, saying; by the faith of my body,you speake but the truth: understand then, if hee have any knowledgein gardening, and whether hee will dwell heere, or no: whichcompasse so kindly as you can. let him have a new paire of shoes, fillhis belly daily full of meate, flatter, and make much of him, forwee shall finde him worke enough to do. all which, the fac-totumpromised to fulfill sufficiently.
massetto, who was not far off from them all this while, but seemedseriously busied about sweeping and making cleane the court, heard allthese speeches; and being not a little joyfull of them; said tohimselfe. if once i come to worke in your garden, let the proofe yeeldpraise of my skill and knowledge. when the fac-totum perceived, thathe knew perfectly how to undergo his businesse, and had questioned himby signes, concerning his willingnesse to serve there still, andreceived the like answere also, of his dutifull readinesse thereto; hegave him order to worke in the garden, because the season did nowrequire it; and to leave all other affayres for the monastery,attending now onely the gardens preparation.
as massetto was thus about his garden emploiment, the nunnes beganto resort thither, and thinking the man to be dumbe and deafe indeede,were the more lavish of their language, mocking and flowting himvery immodestly, as being perswaded, that he heard them not. and thelady abbesse, thinking he might as well be an eunuch, as deprived bothof hearing and speaking, stood the lesse in feare of the sisterswalkes, but referred them to their owne care and providence. on a day,massetto having laboured somewhat extraordinarily, lay downe to resthimselfe awhile under the trees, and two delicate yong nunnes, walkingthere to take the aire, drew neere to the place where he dissembledsleeping; and both of them observing his comelinesse of person,began to pitty the poverty of his condition; but much more themisery of his great defectes. then one of them, who had a littlelivelier spirit then the other, thinking massetto to be fastasleepe, began in this manner.
sister (quoth she) if i were faithfully assured of thy secrecie, iwould tell thee a thing which i have often thought on, and it may(perhaps) redound to thy profit. sister, replyed the other nun, speakeyour minde boldly, and beleeve it (on my maidenhead) that i will neverreveale it to any creature living. encouraged by this solemne answere,the first nun thus prosecuted her former purpose, saying. i know notsister, whether it hath entred into thine understanding or no,strictly we are here kept and attended, never any man daring toadventure among us, except our good and bonest fac-totum, who isvery aged; and this dumbe fellow, maimed, and made imperfect bynature, and therefore not worthy the title of a man. ah sister, ithath oftentimes bin told me, by gentlewomen comming hither to visiteus, that all other sweetes in the world, are mockeries, to theincomparable pleasures of man and woman, of which we are barred by ourunkind parents, binding us to perpetuall chastity, which they werenever able to observe themselves.
a sister of this house once told me, that before her turne came tobe sent to the soldane, she fell in frailty with a man that was bothlame and blinde, and discovering the same to her ghostly father inconfession; he absolved her of that sinne; affirming, that she had nottransgressed with a man, because he wanted his rationall andunderstanding parts. behold sister, heere lyes a creature, almostformed in the self-same mold, dumbe and deafe, which are two themost rationall and understanding parts that do belong to any man,and therefore no man, wanting them. if folly and frailty would becommitted with him (as many times since hee came hither it hath run inmy minde) hee is by nature, sworne to such secrecie, that he cannot(if he would) be a blabbe thereof. beside, the lawes andconstitution of our religion doth teach us, that a sinne soassuredly concealed, is more then halfe absolved.
ave maria sister (saide the other nun) what kinde of words are theseyou utter? doe not you know, that we have promised our virginity togod? oh sister (answered the other) how many things are promised tohim every day, and not one of a thousand kept or performed? if weehave made him such a promise, and some of our weakerwitted sistersdo performe it for us, no doubt but he will accept it in part ofpayment. yea but sister, replied the second nun againe, there isanother danger lying in the way: if we prove to be with childe, howshall we doe then? sister (quoth our couragious wench) thou artaffraide of harme before it happen: if it come so to passe, let usconsider on it then: thou art but a novice in matters of suchmoment, we are provided of a thousand meanes, whereby to preventconception. or, if they should faile, we are so surely fitted, thatthe world shall never know it. let it suffice, our lives must not beby any so much as suspected, our monastery questioned, or our religionrashly scandalized. thus shee schooled her younger sister in wit,albeit as forward as shee in will, and longed as desirouslie, toknow what kinde of creature man was.
after some other questions, how this intention of theirs might beesafely brought to full effect: the sprightly nun that had wit at will,thus answered. you see sister (quoth she) it is now the houre ofmidday, when all the rest of our sisterhood are quiet in theirchambers, because we are then allowed to sleep, for our earlier risingto morning mattins. here are none in the garden now but our selves,and while i awake him, bee you the watch, and afterward follow meein my fortune, for i will valiantly leade you the way. massettoimmitating a dogges sleepe, heard all this conspiracie intendedagainst him, and longed as earnestly till shee came to awake him.which being done, he seeming very simple and sottish, and she chearinghim with flattering behaviour: into the close arbour they went,which the sunnes bright eye could not pierce into, and there i leaveit to the nunnes owne approbation, whether massetto was a manrationall, or no. ill deeds require longer time to contrive, then act;and both the nuns having bene with massetto at this new forme ofconfession, were enjoyned (by him) such an easie and silent penance,as brought them the oftner to shrift, and made him to proove a veryperfect confessour.
desires obtayned, but not fully satisfied, doe commonly urge morefrequent accesse, then wisedome thinkes expedient, or can continuewithout discovery. our two joviall nunnes, not a little proud of theirprivate stolne pleasures, so long resorted to the close arbour, tillanother sister, who had often observed their haunt thither, bymeanes of a little hole in her window; that shee began to suspect themwith massetto, and imparted the same to two other sisters, all threeconcluding, to accuse them before the lady abbesse. but upon a furtherconference had with the offenders, they changed opinion, tooke thesame oath as the forewomen had done; and because they would be freefrom any taxation at all: they revealed their adventures to theother three ignorants, and so fell all eight into one formallconfederacie, but by good and warie observation, least the abbesse herselfe should descry them; finding poore massetto such plenty ofgarden-worke, as made him verie doubtfull in pleasing them all.
it came to passe in the end, that the lady abbesse who all thiswhile imagined no such matter, walking all alone in the garden on aday, found massetto sleeping under an almond tree, having then verylitle businesse to doe, because he had wrought hard all the nightbefore. she observed him to be an hansome man, young, lusty,well-limbde and proportioned, having a mercifull commisseration of hisdumbenesse and deafenes, being perswaded also in like manner, thatif hee were an eunuch too, hee deserved a thousand times the more tobe pittied. the season was exceeding hot, and he lay downe socarelesly to sleepe, that somthing was noted wherein shee intendedto be better resolved, almost falling sicke of the other nunnesdisease. having awaked him, she commanded him by signes that he shouldfollow her to her chamber, where he was kept close so long, that thenunnes grew offended, because the gardiner came not to his dailylabour.
well may you imagine that massetto was no misse-proud man now, to bethus advanced from the garden to the chamber, and by no worse womanthen the lady abbesse her selfe: what signes, shews, or whatlanguage he speaks there, i am not able to expresse; onely itappeared, that his behaviour pleased her so well, as it procured hisdaily repairing thether; and acquainted her with such familiarconversation, as she would have condemned in the nunnes her daughters,but that they were wise enough to keepe it from her. now beganmassetto to consider, that hee had undertaken a taske belonging togreat hercules, in giving content to so many, and by continuingdumbe in this maner, it would redound to his no meane detriment.whereupon, as he was one night sitting by the abbesse, the string thatretained his tongue from speech, brake on a sodaine, and thus hespake.
madam, i have often heard it said, that one cocke may doe service toten several hennes, but ten men can very hardly even with all theirbest endeavour, give full satisfaction every way to one woman; and yeti am tied to content nine, which is farre beyond the compasse of mypower to do. already have i performed so much garden and chamber-work,that i confesse my selfe starke tired, and can travaile no further,and therefore let me entreate you to lycense my departure hence, orfinde some meanes for my better ease. the abbesse bearing himspeake, who had so long ben there stricken into admiration, andaccounting it almost a miracle, said. how commeth this to passe? iverily beleeved thee to be dumbe. madam (quoth massetto) so i wasindeed, but not by nature; onely i had a long lingering sickneswhich bereft me of speech, and which i have not onely recovered againethis night, but shal ever remaine thankfull to you for it.
the abbesse verily credited his answer, demanding what he meant insaying, that he did service to nine? madam, quoth he, this were adangerous question, and not easily answered before fore the eightsisters. upon this reply, the abbesse plainely perceived, that notonely she had fallen into foll but all the nunnes likewise criedguilty too: wherfore being a woman of sound discretion, she wouldnot grant that massetto should depart, but to keepe him still aboutthe nunnes businesse, because the monastery should not bescandalized by him. and the fac-totum being dead a little before,his strange recovery of speech revealed, and some things else moreneerely concerning them: by generall consent, and with the good likingof massetto, he was created the fac-totum of the monasterie.
all the neighboring people dwelling thereabout, who knew massetto tobe dumbe, by fetching home wood daily from the forest, and diversemployments in other places, were made to beleeve, that by thenunnes devout prayers and discipline, as also the merite of the saint,in whose honour the monastery was built and erected, massetto hadhis long restrained speech restored, and was now become their solefactotum, having power now to employ others in drudgeries, and easehimselfe of all such labours. and albeit he made the nunnes to befruitfull, by encreasing some store of yonger sisters, yet all matterswere so close and cleanly catried, as it was never talkt of, tillafter the death of the ladie abbesse, when massetto beganne to grow ingood yeeres, and desired to returne home to his native abiding,which (within a while after) was granted him.
thus massetto being rich and olde, returned home like a wealthyfather, taking no care for the nursing of his children, but bequeathedthem to the place where they were bred and borne, having (by his witand ingenious apprehension) made such a benefit of his youthfullyeeres, that now he merrily tooke ease in his age.
the third day, the second novell
wherein is signified, the providence of a wise man, when
he shall have reason to use revenge. and the cunning meanes
of another, when hee compasseth craft to defend himselfe
from perill
a querry of the stable, belonging to agilulffo, king of thelombardes, found the meanes of accesse to the queenes bed, without anyknowledge or consent in her. this being secretly discovered by theking, and the party known, he gave him a marke, by shearing thehaire of his head. whereupon, he that was so shorne, shearedlikewise the heads of all his fellowes in the lodging, and soescaped the punishment intended towards him.
when the novel of philostratus was concluded, which made some of theladies blush, and the rest to smile: it pleased the queene, that madampampinea should follow next, to second the other gone before; whenshe, smiling on the whole assembly, began thus. there are some menso shallow of capacity, that they will (neverthelesse) make shew ofknowing and understanding such things, as neither they are able todoe, nor appertaine to them: whereby they will sometimes reprehendother new errours, and such faults as they have unwillingly committed,thinking thereby to hide their owne shame, when they make it much moreapparant and manifest. for proofe whereof, faire company, in acontrary kinde i will shew you the subtill cunning of one, who(perhaps) may bee reputed of lesse reckning then massetto; and yethe went beyond a king, that thought himselfe to be a much wiser man.
agilulffo, king of lombardie, according as his predecessours haddone before him, made the principall seate of his kingdome, in thecitie of pavia, having embraced in mariage, tendelinga, the lateleft widdow of vetario, who likewise had beene king of the lombards; amost beautifull wife and vertuous lady, but made unfortunate by amischance. the occurrences and estate of the whole realme, being in anhonourable, quiet and well setled condition, by the discreete care andprovidence of the king; a querrie appertaining to the queenes stableof horse, being a man but of meane and low quality, though comely ofperson, and of equall stature to the king; became immeasurably amorousof the queene. and because his base and servile condition, hadendued him with so much understanding, as to know infallibly, that hisaffection was mounted beyond the compasse of conveniencie: wisely heconcealed it to himselfe, not acquainting any one therewith, or daringso much, as to discover it either by lookes, or any other affectionatebehaviour.
and although hee lived utterly hopelesse, of ever attaining to hishearts desires; yet notwithstanding, hee proudly gloried, that hislove had soared so high a pitch, as to be enamoured of a queene. anddayly, as the fury of his flame encreased; so his cariage was farreabove his fellowes and companions, in the performing of all suchserviceable duties, as any way he imagined might content the queene.whereon ensued, that whensoever shee roade abroad to take the ayre,shee used oftner to mount on the horse, which this querrie broughtwhen shee made her choise, then any of the other that were led byhis fellowes. and this did he esteeme as no meane happinesse to him,to order the stirrope for her mounting, and therefore gave dayly hisdue attendance: so that, to touch the stirrop, but (much more) toput her foote into it, or touch any part of her garments, he thoughtit the onely heaven on earth.
but, as we see it oftentimes come to passe, that by how much thelower hope declineth, so much the higher love ascendeth; even sofell it out with this poore querry; for, most irkesome was it tohim, to endure the heavy waight of his continuall oppressions, nothaving any hope at all of the very least mitigation. and being utterlyunable to relinquish his love divers times he resolved on somedesperate conclusion, which might yet give the world an evidenttestimony, that he dyed for the love he bare to the queene. and uponthis determination, hee grounded the successe of his future fortune,to dye in compassing some part of his desire, without eitherspeaking to the queene, or sending any missive of his love; for tospeake or write, were meerely in vaine, and drew on a worserconsequence then death, which he could bestow on himselfe more easily,and when he listed.
no other course now beleagers his braines, but onely for secretaccesse to the queenes bed, and how he might get entrance into herchamber, under colour of the king, who (as he knew very well) sleptmany nights together from the queene. wherefore, to see in whatmanner, and what the usuall habit was of the king, when he came tokeepe companie with his queene: he hid himselfe divers nights in agallery, which was betweene both their lodging chambers. at length, hesaw the king come forth of his chamber, himselfe all alone, with afaire night-mantle wrapt about him, carrying a lighted taper in theone hand, and a small white wand in the other, so went he on to thequeenes lodging; and knocking at the doore once or twice with thewand, and not using any word, the doore opened, the light was leftwithout, and he entered the chamber, where he stayed not long,before his returning backe againe, which likewise very diligently heobserved.
so familiar was he in the wardrobe, by often fetching andreturning the king and queenes furnitures; that the fellowes to thesame mantle which the king wore when he went to the queene, verysecretly he conveighed away thence with him, being provided of alight, and the very like wand. now bestowes he costly bathings onhis body, that the least sent of the stable might not be felt abouthim; and finding a time sutable to his desire, when he knew the kingto bee at rest in his owne lodging, and all else sleeping in theirbed; closely he steals into the gallery, where alighting his taper,with the tinder purposely brought thither, the mantle folded abouthim, and the wand in his hand, valiantly he adventures upon hislives perill. twice hee knockt softly at the doore, which a waytingwoman immediately opened, and receyving the light, went forth into thegallery, while the supposed king, was conversing with the queene.
alas good queene, heere is a sinne commited without any guiltiethought in thee, as (within a while after) it plainely appeared.for, the querry having compassed what he most coveted, and fearingto forfelte his life by delay, when his amorous desire wasindifferently satisfied: returned backe as he came, the sleepy waitingwoman not so much as looking on him, but rather glad, that she mightget her to rest againe. scarcely was the querrie stept into his bed,unheard or discerned by any of his fellowes, divers of them lodgingboth in that and the next chamber: but it pleased the king to visitethe queene, according to his wonted manner, to the no littlemervaile of the drowsie wayting woman, who was never twice troubled ina night before. the king being in bed, whereas alwayes till then,his resort to the queene, was altogether in sadnesse andmelancholly, both comming and departing without speaking one word: nowhis majestie was become more pleasantly disposing, whereat thequeene began not a little to mervaile. now trust mee sir, quothshee, this hath beene a long wished, and now most welcomealteration, vouchsafing twice in a night to visite me, and both withinthe compasse of one houre; for it cannot be much more, since yourbeing here, and now comming againe.
the king hearing these words, sodainely presumed, that by somecounterfeit person or other, the queene had beene this night beguiled:wherefore (very advisedly) hee considered, that in regard the partywas unknowne to her, and all the women about her; to make no outwardappearance of knowing it, but rather concealed it to himselfe. farrefrom the indiscretion of some haire-braind men, who presently wouldhave answered and sworne; i came hither this night, till now.whereupon many dangers might ensue, to the dishonour and prejudiceof the queene: beside, her error being discovered to her, mightafterward be an occasion, to urge a wandring in her appetite, and tocovet after change againe. but by this silence, no shame redoundedto him or her, whereas prating, must needs be the publisher of openinfamie: yet was hee much vexed in his minde, which neither bylookes or words hee would discover, but pleasantly said to the queene,why madam, although i was once heere before to night, i hope youmislike not my second seeing you, nor if i should please to comeagaine. no truly sir, quoth she, i onely desire you to have care ofyour health. well, said the king, i will follow your counsaile, andnow returne to mine owne lodging againe, committing my queene to hergood rest.
his blood boyling with rage and distemper, by such a monstrousinjurie offered him; he wrapt his night-mantle about out and leavinghis chamber, imagining, that whatsoever he was, needs he must be oneof his owne house: he tooke a light in his hand, and convayed itinto a little lanthorne, purposing to be resolved in his suspition. noguests or strangers were now in his court, but onely such asbelonged to his houshold, who lodged altogether about the escurieand stables, being there appointed to divers beds. now, this was hisconceite, that whosoever had beene so lately familiar with the queene,his heart and his pulse could (as yet) be hardly at rest, but ratherwould be troubled with apparant agitation, as discovering the guilt ofso great an offender. many chambers had he passed thorow, where allwere soundly sleeping, and yet he felt both their brests and pulses.
at last he came to the lodging of the man indeede, that had soimpudently usurped his place, who could not as yet sleepe, for joyof atchieved adventure. when he espied the king come in, knowingwell the occasion of his search, he began to waxe very doubtfull, sothat his heart and pulse beating extreamely, he felt a furtheraddition of feare, as being confidently perswaded, that there wasnow no other way but death, especially if the king discovered hisagony. and although many considerations were in his braine, yetbecause he saw that the king was unarmed, his best refuge was, to makeshew of sleepe, in expectation what the king intended to doe. amongthem all he had sought, yet could not find any likelihood, wherebyto gather a grounded probability; he came to this querry, whoseheart and pulses laboured so strongly, that he said to himselfe, yeamary, this is th man that did the deede.
nevertheless, purposing to make no apparance of his furtherintention, he did nothing else to him, but drawing forth a paire ofsheares, which purposely he brought thither with him, he clippedaway a part of his lockes, which (in those times) they used to wearevery long, to the end that he might the better know him the nextmorning, and so returned backe to his lodging againe. the querry,who partly saw, but felt what was done to him; perceived plainely(being a subtill ingenious fellow) for what intent he was thus marked.wherefore, without any longer dallying, up he rose, and taking a paireof sheares, wherewith they used to trim their horses; softly he wentfrom bed to bed, where they all lay yet soundly sleeping, and cliptaway each mans locke from his right eare, in the selfe same manneras the king had done his, and being not perceived by any one ofthem, quietly he laide him downe againe.
in the morning, when the king was risen, he gave command that beforethe pallace gates were opened, all his whole family should come beforehim, as instantly his will was fulfilled. standing all uncovered inhis presence, he began to consider with himselfe, which of them wasthe man that he had marked. and seeing the most part of them to havetheir lockes cut, all after one and the selfe same manner;marvailing greatly, he saide to himselfe. the man whom i seeke for,though he be but of meane and base condition, yet it plainelyappeareth, that he is of no deject or common understanding. andseeing, that without further clamour and noyse, he could not findout the party he looked for, he concluded, not to win eternallshame, by compassing a poore revenge: but rather (by way ofadmonition) to let the offender know in a word, that he was both notedand observed. so turning to them all, he saide; he that hath doneit, let him be silent, and doe so no more, and now depart about yourbusinesse.
some other turbulent spirited man, no imprisonments, tortures,examinations, and interrogations, could have served his turne; bywhich course of proceeding, he makes the shame to be publikely knowne,which reason requireth to keepe concealed. but admit that condignevengeance were taken, it diminisheth not one tittle of the shame,neither qualifieth the peoples bad affections, who will lash out asliberally in scandal, and upon the very least babling rumor. suchtherfore as heard the kings words, few though they were, yet trulywise; marvelled much at them, and by long examinations amongthemselves, questioned, but came far short of his meaning; the manonely excepted whom indeed they concerned, and by whom they were neverdiscovered, so long as the king lived, neither did he dare at any timeafter, to hazard his life in the like action, under the frownes orfavour of fortune.
the third day, the third novell
declaring, that the lewd qualities of some persons, oftentimes
misguide good people, into great and greevous errors.
under colour of confession, and of a most pure conscience, a faireyong gentlewoman, being amourously affected to an honest man,induced a devoute and solemne religious friar, to advise her in themeanes (without his suspition or perceiving) how to enjoy thebenefit of her friend, and bring her desires to their full effect.
when madam pampinea sate silent, and the querries boldnesse equalledwith his crafty cunning, and great wisedom in the king had passedamongst them with a generall applause; the queene turning her selfe tomadam philomena, appointed her to follow next in order as the rest haddone before her: whereupon philomena began after this maner.
it is my purpose, to acquaint you with a notable mockerie, which wasperformed (not in jest, but earnest) by a faire gentlewoman, to agrave and devoute religious friar, which will yeelde so much themore pleasure and recreation, to every secular understander, if butdiligently he or she doe observe, how commonly those religious persons(at least the most part of them) like notorious fooles, are theinventers of new courses and customes, as thinking themselves morewise and skilful in all things then any other; yet prove to be of noworth or validity, addicting the verie best of all their devices, toexpresse their owne vilenesse of mind, and fatten themselves intheir styes like to pampered swine. and assure your selves worthyladies, that i doe not tell this tale onely to follow the orderenjoyned me; but also to informe you that such saint-like holy sirs,of whom we are too opinionate and credulous, may be, yea and are(divers times) cunningly met withall, in theyr craftinesse, notonely by men, but likewise some of our owne sexe, as shall make itapparant to you.
in our owne city (more full of craft and deceit, then love orfaithfull dealing) there lived not many yeeres since, a gentlewoman ofgood spirit, highly minded, endued with beauty and all commendablequalities, as any other woman (by nature) could be. her name, or anyothers, concerned in this novel, i meane not to make manifest,albeit i know them, because some are yet living, and thereby may bescindalized; and therefore it shall suffice to passe them over witha smile. this gentlewoman, seeing her selfe to be descended of verygreat parentage, and (by chance) married to an artezan, a cloathyer ordraper, that lived by the making and selling of cloth. shee couldnot (because he was a tradesman) take downe the height of her minde;conceiving, that no man of meane condition (how rich soever) wasworthy to enjoy a gentlewoman in marriage. observing moreover, thatwith all his wealth and treasure, he understood nothing better, thento open skeines of yarne, fill shuttles lay webbes in his loomes, ordispute with his spinsters, about their businesse.
being thus over-swayed with her proud opinion, she would no longerbe embraced or regarded by him in any manner, saving only becauseshe could not refuse him, but would find some other for her bettersatisfaction, who might seeme more worthy of her respect, then thedraper her husband did. heereupon shee fell so deepe in love with averie honest man of our city also, and of indifferent yeeres, aswhat day shee saw him not, shee could take no rest the nightensuing. the man himselfe knew nothing hereof, and therefore was themore carelesse: and she being curious, nice, yet wisely considerate,durst not let him understand it, neither by any womans closeconveyed message, nor yet by letters, as fearing the perils whichhappen in such cases. but her eye observing his dayly walkes andresorts, gave her notice of his often conversing with a religiousfriar, who albeit he was a fat and corpulent man, yet notwithstanding,because he seemed to leade a sanctimonious life, and was reported tobe a most honest man, she perswaded her selfe, that he might be thebest meanes betweene her and her friend.
having considered with her selfe, what course was best to beobserved in this case; uppon a day apt and convenient, she went to theconvent where he kept, and having caused him to be called, shee toldhim, that if his leysure so served, very gladly would she beconfessed, and onely had made her choice of him. the holy man seeingher to be a gentlewoman (as indeed she was) willingly heard her; andwhen she had confessed what she could, she had yet another matter toacquaint him withall, and thereupon thus she began.
holy father, it is no more then convenient that i should haverecourse to you, to be assisted by your helpe and counsell, in amatter which i will impart unto you. i know, that you are not ignorantof my parents and husband, of whom i am affected as deerely as hislife, for proofe whereof, there is not any thing that i can desire,but immediately i have it of him, he being a most rich man, and mayvery sufficiently affoord it. in regard whereof, i love him equally asmy selfe, and (setting aside my best endevours for him) i must tellyou one thing quite contrary to his liking and honour: no womancould more worthily deserve death, then my selfe. understand then(good father) that there is a man, whose name i know not, but heseemeth to be honest, and of good worth; moreover (if i am notdeceived) he resorteth oftentimes to you, being faire and comely ofperson, going alwayes in blacke garments of good price and value. thisman, imagining (perhaps) no such minde in mee, as truely there is;hath often attempted mee, and never can i be at my doore, or window,but hee is alwayes present in my sight, which is not a littledispleasing to me; he watcheth my walks, and much i mervaile, thathe is not now heere.
let me tell you holy sir, that such behaviours doe many times laybad imputations upon very honest women, yet without any offence inthem. it hath often run in my mind, to let him have knowledgethereof my min by my brethren: but afterward i considered, that men(many times) deliver messages in such sort, as draw on very ungentleanswers, whereon grow words, and words beget actions. in which regard,because no harme or scandall should ensue, i thought it best to besilent; determining, to acquaint you rather therewith, then to anyother, as wel because you seem to be his friend, as also in regardof your office, which priviledgeth you to correct such abuses, notonely in friends, but also in strangers. enow other women there are,(more is the pitty) who perhaps are better disposed to such suitesthen i am, and can both like and allow of such courting, otherwisethen i can doe; as being willing to embrace such offers, and (happily)loath to yeeld deniall. wherefore, most humbly i entreate you goodfather (even for our blessed ladies sake) that you would give him afriendly reprehension, and advise him to use such unmanly meanes nomore heereafter. with which words, she hung downe her bead in herbosome, cunningly dissembling, as if shee wept, wiping her eyes withher handkerchife, when not a teare fel from them, but indeed weredry enough.
the holy religious man, so soone as he heard her description ofthe man, presently knew whom shee meant, and highly commending thegentlewoman for her good and vertuous seeming disposition, beleevedfaithfully all that shee had said: promising her, to order thematter so well and discreetly, as shee should not any more beeoffended. and knowing her to be a woman of great wealth (after alltheir usuall manner, when they cast forth their fishing nets forgaine:) liberally he commeuned almesdeeds, and dayly workes ofcharity, recounting to her beside his owne particular necessities.then, giving him two peeces of gold, she said: i pray you (goodfather) to be mindfull of me, and if he chance to make any deniall,tell him, that i spake it my selfe to you, and by the way of a sadcomplaint her confession being ended, and penance easie enoughenjoyned her, she promised to make her parents bountifullbenefactors to the convent, and put more money into his hand, desiringhim in his masses, to remember the soules of her deceased friends, andso returned home to her house.
within a short while after her departure, the gentleman, of whomeshe made this counterfeit complaint, came thither, as was his usuallmanner, and having done his duty to the holy father, they sate downetogether privately, falling out of one discourse into another. atthe length, the friar (in very loving and friendly sort) mildlyreproved him for such amorous glaunces, and other pursuites, which (ashe thought) he dayly used to the gentlewoman, according to her ownespeeches. the gentleman mervalled greatly thereat, as one that hadnever seene her, and very sildome passed by the way where sheedwelt, which made him the bolder in his answeres; wherein theconfessour interrupting him, saide. never make such admiration atthe matter, neyther waste more words in deniall, because they cannotserve thy turne; i tell thee plainely, i heard these words even fromher owne selfe, in a very sorowfull and sad complaint. and though(perhaps) heereafter, thou canst very hardly refraine such follies;yet let me tell thee so much of her (and under the seale of absoluteassurance) that she is the onely woman of the world, who to myjudgement, doth abhorre all such base behaviour. in regard thereforeof thine owne honour, as also not to vex and prejudice so vertuous agentlewoman, i pray thee refraine such idlenesse henceforward, andsuffer her to live in peace.
the gentleman being a little wiser then his ghostly father,perceived immediately, the notable pollicy of the woman. whereupon,making somewhat bashfull appearance of any error already committed, hesaid; he would afterward be better advised. so departing from thefriar, hee went on directly, to passe by the house where thegentlewoman dwelt, and shee stood alwayes ready on her watch, at alittle window, to observe when he would walke that way. and seeing himcomming, shee shewed her selfe so joyfull and gracious to him, as heeasily understood, whereto the substance of the holy fathers chidingtended. and from that time forward, he used dayly though in covertmanner (to the no litle liking of the gentlewoman and himselfe) tomake his passage thorough that street, under colour of someimportant occasions there concerning him.
soone after, it being plainely discerned on either side, that theone was as well contented with these walkes, as the other could be:she desired to enflame him a little further, by a more liberallillustration of her affection towards him, when time and placeaffoorded convenient opportunity. to the holy father againe shewent, (for she had beene too long from shrift) and kneeling downe athis feete, intended to begin her confession in teares; which the friarperceiving, sorrowfully demanded of her; what accident had happened?holy father (quoth shee) no novell accident, only your wicked andungracious friend, by whom (since i was heere with you, yea, no longeragoe then yesterday) i have been so wronged, as i verily beleevethat he was borne to bee my mortall enemy, and to make me dosomthing to my utter disgrace for ever; and whereby i shall not dareto be seene any more of you my deare father. how is this? answered thefriar, hath he not refrained from afflicting you so abusively?
pausing a while, and breathing foorth many a dissembled sighe,thus shee replyed. no truely, holy father, there is no likelyhood ofhis abstaining; for since i made my complaint to you, he belike takingit in evil part, to bee contraried in his wanton humours, hath(meerely in despight) walked seaven times in a day by my doore,whereas formerly he never used it above once or twice. and well wereit (good father) if he could be contented with those walkes, andgazing glances which hee dartes at me: but growne he is so bolde andshamelesse, that even yesterday, (as i tolde you) hee sent a womanto me, one of his pandoraes, as it appeared, and as if i had wantedeither purses or girdies, hee sent me by her, a purse and a girdle.whereat i grew so greevously offended, as had it not bene for my duerespect and feare of god, and next the sacred reverence i beare to youmy ghostly father, doubtlesse i had done some wicked deede.neverthelesse, happily i withstood it, and wil neither say or do anything in this case, till first i have made it knowne to you.
then i called to minde, that having redelivered the purse and girdleto his shee-messenger, which brought them with lookes sufficient todeclare my discontentment: i called her backe againe, fearing leastshe would keep them to her selfe, and make him beleeve that i hadreceived them (as i have heard such kinde of women use to dosometimes) and in anger i snatcht them from her, and have brought themyou, to the end, that you may give him them againe; and tell him, ihave no need of any such things, thankes be to heaven and myhusband, as no woman can be better stored then i am. wherefore goodfather, purposely am i now come to you, to let him know, that if hewill not abstaine from thus molesting me, i will disclose it to myhusband, father, and brethren, whatsoever befall. for i had ratherhe should receive the injury, then i to be causelessly blamed for him;wherein good father tell me, if i dooe not well. with manycounterfet sobbes, sighes, and teares these words were delivered;and drawing foorth from under her gowne, a very faire and richpurse, as also a girdle of great worth, she threw them into the friarslappe.
he verily beleeving all this false report, being troubled in hisminde thereat beyond measure, tooke the gentlewoman by the hand,saying: daughter, if thou be offended at these impudent follies,assuredly i cannot blame thee, nor will any wiseman reproove theefor it; and i commend thee for following my counsell. but let me alonefor schooling of my gentleman, ill hath he kept his promise made tome; wherefore, in regard of his former offence, as also this otherso lately committed, i hope to set him in such heate, as shall makehim leave off from further injurying thee. suffer not thy selfe tobe conquerd by choller, in disclosing this to thy kindred orhusband, because too much harme may ensue thereon. but feare not anywrong to thy selfe; for i am a true witnesse of thine honesty andvertue.
now began she to seeme better comforted, and forbearing to play onthis string any longer, as well knowing the covetousnes of him and hisequals, she said: holy father, some few nights past, me thought inmy sleepe, that divers spirits of my kindred appeared to me in avision, who me thought were in very great pains, and desired nothingels but almes; especially my godmother, who seemed to be afflictedwith such extrem poverty, that it was most pittifull to behold. andi am halfe perswaded, that her torments are the greater, seeing metroubled with such an enemy to goodnesse. wherefore (good father) todeliver her soule and the others out of those fearfull flames, amongyour infinite other devout prayers, i would have you to say theforty masses of s. gregory, as a means for their happy deliverance,and so she put ten ducates into his hand. which the holy man acceptedthankfully, and with good words, as also many singular examples,confirmed her bountifull devotion: and when he had given her hisbenediction, home she departed.
after that the gentlewoman was gone, hee sent for his friend whomshe so much seemed to be troubled withall; and when he was come, heebeholding his holy father to looke discontentedly, thought, that nowhe should heare some newes from his mistresse, and thereforeexpected what he would say. the friar, falling into the course ofhis former reprehensions, but yet in more rough and impatientminner, sharpely checkt him for his immodest behaviour towards thegentlewoman, in sending her the purse and girdle. the gentleman, whoas yet could not guesse whereto his speeches tended; somewhat coldlyand temperately, denied the sending of such tokens to her, to theend that he would not bee utterly discredited with the good man, if sobee the gentlewoman had shewne him any such things. but then thefrier, waxing much more angry, sternly said. bad man as thou art,how canst thou deny a manifest truth? see sir, these are none ofyour amorous tokens? no, i am sure you doe not know them, nor ever sawthem till now.
the gentleman, seeming as if he were much ashamed, saide. truelyfather i do know them, and confesse that i have done ill, and verygreatly offended: but now i will sweare unto you, seeing iunderstand how firmely she is affected, that you shall never heare anymore complaint of me. such were his vowes and protestations, as in theend the ghostly father gave him both the purse and girdle: thenafter he had preached, and severely conjured him, never more to vexeher with any gifts at all, and he binding himselfe thereto by asolemne promise, he gave him license to depart. now grew the gentlemanvery jocond, being so surely certifyed of his mistresses love, andby tokens of such worthy esteeme; wherefore no sooner was he gone fromthe frier, but he went into such a secret place, where he could lether behold at her window, what precious tokens he had received fromher, whereof she was extraordinarily joyfull, because her devices grewstill better and better; nothing now wanting, but her husbandsabsence, upon some journey from the city, for the full effecting ofher desire.
within a few dayes after, such an occasion hapned, as her husband ofnecessity must journey to geneway; and no sooner was he mounted onhorsebacke, taking leave of her and all his friends: but she, beingsure he was gone, went in all hast to her ghostly father; and, after afew faigned outward shewes, thus she spake. i must now plainely tellyou, holy father, that i can no longer endure this wicked friend ofyours; but because i promised you the other day, that i would not doany thing, before i had your counsell therein, i am now come to tellyou, the just reason of my anger, and full purpose to avoid allfurther mollestation.
your friend cannot terme him, but (questionlesse) a very divell ofhell: this morning, before the breake of day, having heard (but how, iknow not) that my husband was ridden to geneway: got over the wallinto my garden, and climbing up a tree which standeth close beforemy chamber window, when i was fast asleepe, opened the casement, andwould have entred in at the window. but, by great good fortune, iawaked, and made shew of an open outcry: but that he entreated me,both for gods sake and yours, to pardon him this error, and neverafter he would presume any more to offend me. when he saw, that (foryour sake) i was silent, he closed fast the window againe, departed ashe came, and since i never saw him, or heard any tidings of him. nowjudge you, holy father, whether these be honest courses or no, andto be endured by any civill gentlewoman; neither would i sopatiently have suffered this, but onely in my dutifull reverence toyou.
the ghostly father hearing this, became the sorrowfullest man in theworld, not knowing how to make her any answere, but only demanded ofher divers times, whether she knew him so perfectly, that she didnot mistake him for some other? quoth she, i would i did not knowhim from any other. alas deere daughter (replied the frier) what canmore be sayd in this case, but that it was over-much boldnesse, andvery ill done, and thou shewedst thy selfe a worthy wise woman, insending him away so mercifully, as thou didst. once more i wouldentreat thee (deere and vertuous daughter) seeing grace hathhitherto kept thee from dishonor, and twice already thou hast creditedmy counsell, let me now advise thee this last time. spare speech, orcomplaining to any other of thy friends, and leave-it to me, to try ifi can overcome this unchained divell, whom i tooke to be a much moreholy man. if i can recall him from this sensuall appetite, i shallaccount my labour well employed; but if i cannot do it, henceforward(with my blessed benediction) i give thee leave to do, even what thyheart will best tutor thee to. you see sir (said shee) what mannerof man he is, yet would i not have you troubled or disobeyed, only idesire to live without disturbance, which worke (i beseech you) asbest you may: for i promise you, good father, never to solicite youmore uppon this occasion: and so, in a pretended rage, she returnedbacke from the ghostly father.
scarsely was she gone forth of the church, but in commeth the manthat had (supposedly) so much transgressed; and the fryer taking himaside, gave him the most injurious words that could be used to aman, calling him disloyall, perjured, and a traitor. he who hadformerly twice perceived, how high the holy mans anger mounted, didnothing but expect what he would say; and, like a man extreamlyperplexed, strove how to get it from him, saying; holy father, howcome you to be so heinously offended? what have i done to incenseyou so strangely? heare me dishonest wretch answered the frier, listenwhat i shall say unto thee. thou answerest me, as if it were a yeareor two past, since so foule abuses were by thee committed, and theyalmost quite out of thy remembrance. but tell me wicked man; wherewast thou this morning, before breake of the day? wheresoever i was,replyed the gentleman, mee thinkes the tidings come very quickly toyou. it is true, said the frier, they are speedily come to meindeed, and upon urgent necessity.
after a little curbing in of his wrath, somewhat in a milderstraine, thus he proceeded. because the gentlewomans husband isjourneyed to geneway, proves this a ladder to your hope, that toembrace her in your armes, you must climbe over the garden wall,like a treacherous robber in the night season, mount up a treebefore her chamber window, open the casement, as hoping to compassethat by importunity, which her spotlesse chastity will never permit.there is nothing in the world, that she can hate more then you, andpossibly yet you will love her whether [she] will or no. manydemonstrations her selfe hath made to you, how retrograde you are toany good conceit of her, and my loving admonishments might have hadbetter successe in you, then as yet they shew of outward apparance.but one thing i must tell you, her silent sufferance of yourinjuries all this while, hath not bin in any respect of you, but at myearnest entreaties, and for my sake. but now she w be patient nolonger, and i have given her free license, if ever heereafter youoffer to attempt her any more, to make her complaint before herbrethren, which will redound to your no meane danger.
the gentleman, having wisely collected his love-lesson out of theholy fathers angry words, pacified the good old man so well as hecould with very solemne promises and protestations, that he shouldheare no more) any misbehaviour of his. and being gone from him,followed the instructions given in her complaint, by climbing over thegarden wall, ascending the tree, and entering at the casement,standing ready open to welcome him. thus the friers simplicity,wrought on by her most ingenious subtiltie, made way to obtaine boththeir longing desires.
the third day, the fourth novell
wherein is declared, what craft and subtilty some wily wits
can devise, to deceive the simple, and compasse their owne
desires.
a yong scholler, named felice, enstructed puccio di rinieri, howto become rich in a very short time. while puccio made experience ofthe instructions taught him; felice obtained the favour of hisdaughter.
after that philomena had finished her tale, she sate still; anddioneus (with faire and pleasing language) commended thegentlewomans quaint cunning, but smiling at the confessors witlessesimplicity. then the queene, turning with chearefull looks towardpamphilus, commaunded him to continue on their delight; who gladlyyeelded, and thus began. madame, many men there are, who while theystrive to climbe from a good estate, to a seeming better; doe becomein much worse condition then they were before. as happened to aneighbour of ours, and no long time since, as the accident will betteracquaint you withall.
according as i have heard it reported, neere to saint brancazio,there dwelt an honest man, and some-what rich, who was called pucciodi rinieri, and who addicted all his paines and endeavours to alchimy:wherefore, he kept no other family, but onely a widdowed daughter, anda servant; and because he had no other art or exercise, he usedoften to frequent the market place. and in regard he was but a weakewitted man and a gourmand or grosse feeder; his language was themore harsh and rude; like to our common porters or sottish men, andhis carriage also absurd, boore-like, and clownish. his daughter,being named monna isabetta, aged not above eight and twenty, or thirtyyeeres; was a fresh indifferent faire, plumpe, round woman, cherrycheekt, like a queene-apple; and, to please her father, fed not sosparingly, as otherwise she would have done, but when she communedor jested with any body, she would talke of nothing, but onelyconcerning the great vertue in alchimy, extolling it above all otherarts.
much about this season of the yeare, there returned a young schollerfrom paris, named felice, faire of complexion, comely of person,ingeniously witted and skilfully learned, who (soone after) grewinto familiarity, with puccio: now because he could resolve him inmany doubts, depending on his profession of alchimy, (himselfehaving onely practise, but no great learning) he used many questionsto him, shewed him very especiall matters of secrecy, entertaining himoften to dinners and suppers, whensoever he pleased to come andconverse with him; and his daughter likewise, perceiving with whatfavour her father respected him, became the more familiar with him,allowing him good regard and reverence.
the young man continuing his resort to the house of puccio, andobserving the widdow to be faire, fresh, and prettily formall; hebegan to consider with himselfe, what those things might be, whereinshe was most wanting; and (if he could) to save anothers labour,supply them by his best endeavours. thus not alwayes carrying his eyesbefore him, but using many backe and circumspect regards, he proceededso farre in his wylie apprehensions, that (by a few sparkes close kepttogether) he kindled part of the same fire in her, which began toflame apparantly in him. and hee very wittily observing the same, asoccasion first smiled on him, and allowed him favourableopportunity, so did hee impart his intention to her.
now albeit he found her plyant enough, to gaine physicke for herowne griefe, as soone as his; yet the meanes and manner were (asyet) quite out of all apprehension. for shee in no other part of theworld, would trust her selfe in the young mans company, but onely inher fathers house; and that was a place out of all possibility,because puccio (by a long continued custome) used to watchwell-neere all the night, as commonly he did, each night afterother, never stirring foorth of the roomes, which much abated the edgeof the young mans appetite. after infinite intricate revolvings,wheeling about his busied braine, he thought it not altogether anherculian taske, to enjoy his happinesse in the house, and without anysuspition, albeit puccio kept still within doores, and watched ashee was wont to doe.
upon a day as he sate in familiar conference with puccio, he beganto speake unto him in this manner; i have many times noted, kindefriend puccio, that all thy desire and endeavour is, by what meanesthou mayst become very rich, wherein (me thinkes) thou takest too widea course, when there is a much neerer and shorter way, which mighellscotus, and other his associates, very diligently observed andfollowed, yet were never willing to instruct other men therein;whereby the mysterie might bee drowned in oblivion, and prosecutedby none but onely great lords, that are able to undergoe it. butbecause thou art mine especiall friend, and i have received fromthee infinite kind favours; whereas i never intended, that any man (byme) should be acquainted with so rare a secret; if thou wilt imitatethe course as i shall shew thee, i purpose to teach it thee in fullperfection. puccio being very earnestly desirous to understand thespeediest way to so singular a mysterie, first began to entreat him(with no meane instance) to acquaint him with the rules of so rich ascience; and afterward sware unto him, never to disclose it to anyperson, except hee gave his consent thereto; affirming beside, that itwas a rarity, not easie to bee comprehended by very apprehensivejudgements. well (quoth felice) seeing thou has: made me such asound and solemne promise, i will make it knowne unto thee.
know then friend puccio, the philosophers do hold, that such ascovet to become rich indeed, must understand how to make the stone: asi will tell thee how, but marke the manner very heedfully. i do notsay, that after the stone is obtained, thou shalt bee even as richas now thou art; but thou shalt plainly perceive, that the verygrosest substances, which hitherto thou hast seene, all of them shalbemade pure golde: and such as afterward thou makest, shall be morecertaine, then to go or come with aqua fortis, as now they do. mostexpedient is it therefore, that when a man will go diligently aboutthis businesse, and purposeth to prosecute such a singular labour,which will and must continue for the space of 40 nights, he mustgive very carefull attendance, wholly abstaining from sleepe,slumbering, or so much as nodding all that while.
moreover, in some apt and convenient place of thy house, theremust be a forge or furnace erected, framed in decent and formallfashion, and neere it a large table placed, ordered in such sort, asstanding upright on feete, and leaning the reines of thy backe againstit; thou must stande stedfastly in that manner every night, withoutthe least motion or stirring, untill the breake of day appeareth,and thine eyes still uppon the furnace fixed, to keepe ever in memory,the true order which i have prescribed. so soone as the morning isseene, thou mayest (if thou wilt) walke, or rest a little upon thybed, and afterward go about thy businesse, if thou have any. then goto dinner, attending readily till the evenings approch, preparing suchthings as i will readily set thee downe in writing, without whichthere is not any thing to bee done; and then returne to the same taskeagaine, not varying a jot from the course directed. before the time befully expired, thou shalt perceive many apparant signes, that thestone is still in absolute forwardnesse, but it will bee utterlylost if thou fayle in the least of all the observances. and when theexperience hath crowned thy labour, thou art sure to have thephilosophers stone, and thereby shalt be able to enrich all, and workewonders beside.
puccio instantly replyed. now trust me sir, there is no greatdifficultie in this labour, neither doth it require anyextraordinary length of time: but it may very easily be followed andperformed, and (by your friendly favor, in helping to direct thefurnace and table, according as you imagine most convenient) on sundayat night next, i will begin my taske.the place which puccio had chosen, for his hopefull attaining tothe philosophers stone, was close to the chamber where his daughterlay having no other separation or division, but an old ruinoustottring wall. so that, when the scholler was playing his prize,puccio heard an unwonted noise in the house, which he had neverobserved before, neither knew the wall to have any such motion:wherefore, not daring to stirre from his standing, least all should bemarrd in the very beginning, he called to his daughter, demanding,what busle labour she was about? the widdow, being much addicted tofrumping according as questions were demanded of her, and (perhaps)forgetting who spake to her, pleasantly replied: whoop sir, whereare we now? are the spirits of alchimy walking in the house, that wecannot lye quietly in our beds?
pucclo mervalling at this answere, knowing she never gave him thelike before; demanded againe, what she did? the subtle wench,remembring that she had not answered as became her, said: pardon meefather, my wits were not mine owne, when you demanded such a sodainequestion; and i have heard you say an hundred times, that when folkego supperles to bed, either they walke in their sleepe, or beingawake, talke very idely, as (no doubt) you have discern'd by me. naydaughter (quoth he) it may be, that i was in a waking dreame, andthought i heard the olde wall totter: but i see i was deceived, for noit is quiet and still enough. talke no more good father, saide she,least you stirre from your place, and hinder your labour: take no carefor mee, i am able enough to have care of my selfe.
to prevent any more of these nightly disturbances, they went tolodge in another part of the house, where they continued out thetime of puccioes paines, with equall contentment to them both, whichmade her divers times say to felice: you teach my father the cheefegrounds of alchimy, while we helpe to waste away his treasure. thusthe scholler being but poore, yet well forwarded in learning, made useof puccioes folly, and found benefit thereby, to keepe him out ofwants, which is the bane and overthrow of numberlesse good wits. andpuccio dying, before the date of his limited time, because he failedof the philosophers stone, isabetta joyned in marriage with felice, tomake him amends for instructing her father, by which meanes he came tobe her husband.
the third day the fifth novell
wherein is described the frailety of some women, and folly of
such husbands, as leave them alone to their owne disposition
ricciardo surnamed the magnifico, gave a horse to signiorfrancesco vergillisi, on condition that he might speake to his wife inhis presence; which he did, and she not returning him any answer, madeanswer to himselfe on her behalfe, and according to his answer, so theeffect followed.
pamphilus having ended his novell of puccio the alchimist, thequeene fixing her eye on madam eliza, gave order, that shee shouldsucceed. she looking somewhat more austerely then any of the restnot in any spleen, but as it was her usuall manner, thus began. theworld containeth some particular people, who beleeve (because theyknow something) that others are ignorant in all things, who for themost part, while they intend to make a scorne of other men, upontriall, finde themselves to carry away the scorne. therefore, iaccount it no meane folly in them, who (upon no occasion) wil temptthe power of another mans wit or experience. but because all men andwomen are not of my opinion; i meane that you shall perceive it moreapparantly, by an accident happening to a knight of pistoia, as youshall heare by me related.
in the town of pistoia, bordering upon florence, there lived notlong since, a knight named signieur francesco, descended of the linageor family of the vergellisi, a man very rich, wise, and in many thingsprovident, but gripple, covetous, and too close handed, withoutrespect to his worth and reputation. he being called to the officeof podesta in the city of millaine, furnished himselfe with all things(in honourable manner) beseeming such a charge; onely, a comelyhorse for his owne saddle excepted, which he knew not by any meaneshow to compasse, so loath hee was lay out money, albeit his creditmuch depended thereon.
at the same time, there lived in pistoya likewise, a young man,named ricciardo, derived of meane birth, but very wealthy, quickewitted, and of commendable person, alwayes going so neate, fine, andformall in his apparrell, that he was generally tearmed the magnifico,who had long time affected, yea, and closely courted, (though anyadvantage or successe) the lady and wife of signior francesco, who wasvery beautifull, vertuous, and chaste. it so chanced, that thismagnifico had the very choisest and goodliest ambling gelding in alltuscany, which hee loved dearely, for his faire forme, and othergood parts. upon a flying rumor throughout pistoia, that he daily madelove to the foresaid ladie, some busie-body put it into the head ofsignior francesco, that if he pleased to request the gelding, themagnifico would frankely give it him, in regard of the love he bare tohis wife.
the base-minded knight, coveting to have the horse, and yet not topart with any money, sent for the magnifico, desiring to buy his fayregelding of him, because he hoped to have him of free gift. themagnifico hearing this request, was very joyfull, and thus answered;sir, if you would give me all the wealth which you possesse in thisworld, i wil not sell you my horse, rather i wil bestow him on youas a gentlemans gift: but yet upon this condition, that before youhave him delivered, i may with your license, and in your presencespeake a few words to your vertuous ladie, and so farre off indistance from you, as i may not be heard by any, but onely herselfe. signior francesco, wholly conducted by his base avariciousdesire, and meaning to make a scorne at the magnifico, made answer,that he was well contented to let him speak with her when he would;and leaving him in the great hall of the house, went to his wiveschamber, and told her how easily he might enjoy the horse,commanding her forthwith to come and heare what he could say to her,only she should abstaine, and not returne him any answer. the ladywith a modest blush, much condemned this folly in him, that hiscovetousnes should serve as a cloake to cover any unfitting speecheswhich her chaste eares could never endure to heare. neverthelessebeing to obey her husbands will, she promised to do it, and followedhim down into the hall, to heare what the magnifico would say.againe he there confirmed the bargaine made with her husband, andsitting downe by her in a corner of the hall, farre enough off fromany ones hearing, taking her curteously by the hand, thus he spake.
worthy lady, it seemeth to me, that you are so truly wise, as nodoubt you have long since perceived, what unfeigned affection yourbeauty (far excelling) hath compelled me to beare you. setting asidethose commendable qualities and singular vertues gloriously shining inyou, and powerfull enough to make a conquest of the stoutestcourage, i held it utterly needlesse, to let you understand bywords, how faithfull the love is i bear you, were it not much morefervent and constant, then ever any other man can expresse to a woman.in which condition it shall still continue, without the leastblemish or impayre, so long as i enjoy life or motion; yea, and i dareassure you, that if in the future world, affection may containe thesame powerfull dominion, as it doth in this; i am the man borne tolove you perpetually. whereby you may rest confidently perswaded, thatyou enjoy not any thing, how poore or precious soever it be, which youcan so solemnely account to be your owne, and in the truest title ofright, as you may my selfe, in all that i have, or for ever shall bemine.
to confirme your opinion in this case by any argument of greaterpower, let me tell you, that i should repute it as my fairest and mostgracious fortune, if you would command me some such service, asconsisteth in mine ability to performe, and in your courteous favourto accept, yea, if it were thorow the whole world, right to travalam i, and obedient. in which regard faire madam, if i be so much,yours, as you heare i am, i may boldly adventure (and not without goodreason) to acquaint your chaste eares with my earnest desires, foron you onely depends my happinesse, life, and absolute comfort, and asyour most humble servant, i beseech you (my deerest good, and solehope of my soule) that rigour may dwell no longer in your gentlebrest, but lady-like pitty and compassion, whereby i shall say, thatas your divine beauty enflamed mine affections, even so it extendedsuch a merciful qualification, is exceeded all my hope, but not thehalfe part of your pitty.
admit (myracle of ladies) that i should die in this distresse: alas,my death would be but your dishonour; i cannot be termed mine ownemurtherer, when the dart came from your eye that did it, and mustremaine a witnes of your rigor. you cannot then chuse but call tominde, and say within your own soule: alas, what a sinne have icommitted, in being so unmercifull to my magnifico. repentance thenserves to no purpose, but you must answer for such unkinde cruelty.wherefore, to prevent so blacke a scandall to your bright beauty,beside the ceaselesse acclamations, which will dog your walkes inthe day time, and breake your quiet sleepes in the night season,with fearefull sights and gastly apparitions, hovering and hauntingabout your bed; let all these moove you to milde mercy, and spillnot life, when you may save it.
so the magnifico ceasing, with teares streaming from his eyes, andsighes breaking from his heart, hee sate still in expectation of theladies answere, who made neither long or short of the matter,neither tilts nor tourneying, nor many lost mornings and evenings, norinfinite other such like offices, which the magnifico (for her sake)from time to time had spent in vaine, without the least shew ofacceptation, or any hope at all to winne her love: mooved now inthis very houre, by these solemne is protestations, or rather mostprevailing asseverations, she began to finde that in her, which(before) she never felt, namely love. and although (to keepe herpromise made to her husband) shee spake not a word: yet her heartheaving, her soule throbbing, sighes intermixing, and complexionaltering, could not hide her intended answer to the magnifico, ifpromise had beene no hinderance to her will. all this while themagnifico sate as mute as she, and seeing she would not give him anyanswere at all, he could not choose but wonder thereat, yet atlength perceived, that it was thus cunningly contrived by her husband.notwithstanding, observing well her countenance, that it was in aquite contrary temper, another kinde of fire sparkling in her eye,other humours flowing, her pulses strongly beating, her stomackerising, and sighes swelling, all these were arguments of a change, andmotives to advance his hope. taking courage by this ticklishperswasion, and instructing his mind with a new kinde of counsell;he would needes answer himselfe on her behalfe, and as if she haduttered the words, thus he spake.
magnifico, and my friend, surely it is a long time since, when ifirst noted thine affection toward me to be very great and mostperfect, but now i am much more certain thereof, by thine ownehonest and gentle speeches, which content me as they ought to do.neverthelesse, if heretofore i have seemed cruell and unkinde to thee,i would not have thee thinke, that my heart was any way guilty of myoutward severity, but did evermore love thee, and held thee deererthen any man living. but yet it became me to do so, as well in feareof others, as for the renowne of mine owne reputation. but now isthe time at hand, to let thee knowe more clearly, whether i doaffect thee or no: as a just guerdon of thy constant lovewhich long thou hast, and still doest beare to me. wherefore,comfort thy selfe, and dwell on this undoubted hope, because signiorfrancesco my husband, is to be absent hence for many dayes, beeingchosen podesta at millaine, as thou canst not choose but heare, for itis common through the country.
i know (for my sake) thou hast given him thy goodly ambling gelding,and so soone as he is gone, i promise thee upon my word, and by thefaithfull love i beare thee; that i will have further conferencewith thee, and let thee understand somewhat more of my minde. andbecause this is neither fitting time nor place, to discourse onmatters of such serious moment: observe heereafter, as a signall, whenthou seest my crimson skarfe hanging in the window of my chamber,which is upon the garden side, that evening (so soone as it isnight) come to the garden gate, with wary respect that no eye dodiscover thee, and there thou shalt finde me walking, and ready toacquaint thee with other matters, according as i shall finde occasion.
when the magnifico in the person of the lady, had spoken thus,then he returned her this answer. most vertuous lady, my spirits areso transported with extraordinary joy, for this your gracious andwelcome answer, that my sences faile me, and all my faculties quiteforsake me, that i cannot give you such thankes as i would. and if icould speak equally to my desire, yet the season suites not therewith,neither were it convenient that i should be so troublesome to you. letme therefore humbly beseech you, that the desire i have toaccomplish your will (which wordes availe not to expresse) may remainein your kinde consideration. and as you have commanded me, so will inot faile to performe it accordingly, and in more thankfull manner,then (as yet) i am able to let you know. now there resteth nothingelse to do, but under the protection of your gracious pardon, i togive over speech, and you to attend your woorthy husband.
notwithstanding all that hee had spoken, yet shee replyed not oneword; wherefore the magnifico arose, and returned to the knight, whowent to meete him, saying in a lowd laughter. how now man? have inot kept my promise with thee? no sir, answered the magnifico, for youpromised i should speake with your wife, and you have made mee talketo a marble statue. this answere, was greatly pleasing to theknight, who, although hee had an undoubted opinion of his wife; yetthis did much more strengthen his beliefe, and hee said. now thouconfessest thy gelding to bee mine? i doe, replied the magnifico,but if i had thought, that no better successe would have ensued on thebargaine; without your motion for the horse, i would have given himyou: and i am sorie that i did not, because now you have bought myhorse, and yet i have not sold him. the knight laughed heartily atthis answer, and being thus provided of so faire a beast, hee rodeon his journey to millaine, and there entred into his authority ofpodesta.
the lady remained now in liberty at home, considering on themagnificoes words, and likewise the gelding, which (for her sake)was given to her husband. oftentimes shee saw him passe too and frobefore her windowe, still looking when the flagge of defiance shouldbe hanged forth, that hee might fight valiantly under her colours. thestory saith, that among many of her much better meditations, sheewas heard to talke thus idely to her selfe. what doe i meane?wherefore is my youth? the olde miserable man is gone to millaine, andgod knoweth when hee comes backe againe, ever, or never. is dignitypreferred before wedlockes holy duty, and pleasures abroade, more thencomforts at home? ill can age pay youths arrerages, when: time isspent, and no hope sparde. actions omitted, are oftentimes repented,but done in due season, they are sildome sorrowed for. upon theseun-lady-like private consultations, whether the window shewed thesigna or no; it is no matter belonging to my charge: i say, husbandsare unwise, to graunt such ill advantages, and wives much worse, ifthey take hold of them, onely judge you the best, and so the tale isended.
the third day the sixth novell
declaring, how much perseverance, and a couragious spirit is
available in love
ricciardo minutolo fell in love with the wife of philippellofighinolfi, and knowing her to be very jealous of her husband, gaveher to understand, that hee was greatly enamoured of his wife, and hadappointed to meete her privately in a bathing house, on the next dayfollowing: where shee hoping to take him tardie with his closecompacted mistresse, found her selfe to be deceived by the saidricciardo.
no more remained to be spoken by madame eliza, but the cunning ofthe magnifico, being much commended by all the company: the queenecommanded madame fiammetta, to succede next in order with one of hernovels, who (smiling) made answer that shee would, and began thus.gracious ladies, mee thinkes wee have spoken enough already,concerning our owne citie, which as it aboundeth copiously in allcommodities, so is it an example also to every convenient purpose. andas madam eliza hath done, by recounting occasions happening in anotherworld, so must we now leape a little further off, even so far asnaples, to see how one of those saint-like dames that nicely seemes toshun loves allurings, was guided by the good spirit to a friend ofhers, and tasted of the fruite, before she knew the flowers. asufficient warning for you to apprehend before hand what may followafter, and to let you see beside, that when an error is committed, howto bee discreete in keeping it from publike knowledge.
in the citie of naples, it being of great antiquity, and (perhaps)as pleasantly situated, as any other city in all italy, there dweltsometime a yong gentleman, of noble parentage, and well knowne tobee wealthy, named ricciardo minutolo, who although hee had agentlewoman of excellent beuty, and worthy the verie kindest affectingto his wife; yet his gadding eye gazed elsewhere, and he becameenamored of another, which (in generall opinion) surpassed all theneapolitane women else, in feature, favour, and the choysestperfections, shee being named madam catulla wife to as gallant a younggentleman, called philippello fighinolfi, who most dearly he lovedbeyond all other, for her vertue and admired chastity.
ricciardo loving this madam catulla, and using all such meanswhereby the grace and liking of a lady might be obtained; found it yeta matter beyond possibility, to compasse the height of his desire:so that many desperate and dangerous resolutions beleagred his braine,seeming so intricate and unlikely to affoord any hopefull yssue, ashee wished for nothing more then death.
and death (as yet) being deafe to all his earnest imprecations,delayed him on in lingering afflictions: and continuing still insuch an extreame condition, he was advised by some of his bestfriends, utterly to abstaine from this fond pursuit, because his hopeswere meerely in vaine, and madam catulla prized nothing moreprecious to her in the world, then unstayned loyaltie to herhusband: and yet shee lived in such extreame jealousie of him, asfearing least some bird flying in the ayre should snatch him from her.
ricciardo not unacquainted with this her jealous humour, as wellby credible hearing thereof, as also by daily observation, began towith himselfe, that it were best to consider for him, to dissembleamorous affection in some other place, and (henceforward) to set asideall hope, of ever enjoying the love of madam catulla, because he wasnow become the servant to another gentlewoman, pretending (in herhonour) to performe many worthy actions of armes, joustes,tournaments, and all such like noble exercises, as he was wont todoe for madam catulla. so that most of the people of naples, butespecially madam catulla, becam perswaded, that his formerfruitlesse love to her was quite changed, and the new elected lady hadall the glory of his best endevours, persevering so long in thisopinion, as now it passed absolutely for currant. thus seemed he nowas meere a stranger to her, whose house before he familiarlyfrequented, yet as a neighbour gave her the daies salutations,according as he chanced to see her, or meet her.
it came so to passe, that it being now the delightfull summerseason, when all gentlemen and gentlewomen used to meete together(according to a custome long observed in that country) sportingalong on the sea coast, dining and supping there very often, ricciardominutolo happened to heare, that madam catulla (with a company ofher friends) intended also to be present there among them; at whichtime, consorted with a seemely traine of his confederates, he resortedthither, and was graciously welcommed by madam catulla, where hepretended no willing long time of tarrying, but that catulla and theother ladies were faine to entreate him, discoursing of his love tohis new elected mistresse: which minutolo graced with so solemne acountenance, as it ministred much more matter of conference, allcoveting to know what she was.
so farre they walked, and held on this kinde of discoursing, asevery lady and gentlewoman, waxing weary of too long a continuedargument, began to separate her selfe with such an associate as sheebest liked, and as in such walking women are wont to doe; so thatmadam catulla having few females left with her, stayed behind withminutolo, who sodainly shot forth a word concerning her husbandphilipello, and of his loving another woman beside her selfe. she thatwas overmuch jealous before, became so sodainely set on fire to knowwhat shee was of whom minutolo spake, as she sat silent a longwhile, til being able to containe no longer, shee entreatedricciardo even for the ladies sake, whose love he had so devoutlyembraced, to resolve her certainly in this strange alteration of herhusband; whereunto thus he answered.
madam, you have so straitly concured me, by urging the remembranceof her; for whose sake i am not able to deny any thing you can demand,as i am readie therein to pleasure you. but first you must promise me,that neither you, or any other person for you, shall at any timedisclose it to your husband, untill you have seene by effect, thatwhich i have told you proveth to be true: and when you please, i wilinstruct you how your selfe shall see it. the ladie was not a littlejoyfull to be thus satisfied in her husbands folly, and constantlycrediting his words to be true, shee sware a solemne oath, that no onealive should ever know it. so stepping a little further aside, becauseno listening eare should heare him, thus he beganne.
lady, if i did love you now so effectually as heeretofore i havedone, i should be very circumspect, in uttering any thing which iimmagined might distast you. i know not whether your husbandphilipello, were at any time offended, because i affected you, orbeleeved that i received any kindnes from you: but whether it wereso or no, i could never discerne it by any outward apparance. butnow awaiting for the opportunity of time, which he conceived shouldaffoord me the least suspition, he seekes to compasse that, which (idoubt) he feares i would have done to him, in plaine termes madam,to have his pleasure of my wife. and as by some carriages i haveobserved, within few daies past he hath solicited and pursued hispurpose very secretly, by many ambassages, and meanes, as (indeed) ihave learned from her selfe, and alwaies she hath returned in suchanswers, as she receyved by my direction.
and no longer ago madam, then this very morning, before my comminghither, i found a woman-messenger in my house, in very closeconference with my wife, when growing doubtfull of that which was trueindeede, i called my wife, enquiring, what the woman would have withher; and she told me, it was another pursuite of philipellofighinolfi, who (quoth shee) upon such answers as you have caused meto send him from time to time, perhappes doth gather some hope ofprevailing in the end, which maketh him still to importune me as hedoth. and now he adventureth so farre, as to understand my finallintention, having thus ordered his complot, that when i please, i mustmeet him secretly in a house of this city, where he hath prepared abath ready for me, and hopeth to enjoy the end of his desire, asvery earnestly he hath solicited me thereto. but if you had notcommanded me, to hold him in suspense with so many frivolousanswers, i would ere this, have sent him such a message, as shouldhave bene little to his liking.
with patience madam i endured all before, but now (me thinkes) heproceedeth too farre, which is not any way to be suffered; andtherefore i intended to let you know it, that you may perceive, howwel you are rewarded for the faithfull and loyall love you bearehim, and for which, i was even at deaths dore. now, because you may bethe surer of my speeches, not to be any lyes or fables, and that youmay (if you please) approve the truth by your owne experience, icaused my wife to send him word, that she would meet him to morrowat the bathing-house appointed, about the houre of noone-day, whenpeople repose themselves in regard of the heates violence; withwhich answer the woman returned very jocondly. let me now tell youlady, i hope you have better opinion of my wit, then any meaning inme, to send my wife thither; i rather did it to this end, thathaving acquainted you with his treacherous intent, you should supplymy wives place, by saving both his reputation and your owne, andfrustrating his unkind purpose to me. moreover, upon the view of hisowne delusion, wrought by my wife in meere love to you, he shall seehis foule shame, and your most noble care, to keepe the rites ofmarriage betweene you still unstained.
madame catulla, having heard this long and unpleasing report,without any consideration, either what he was that tolde the tale,or what a treason he intended against her: immediately (as jealouspersons use to doe) she gave faith to his forgerie, and began todiscourse many things to him, which imagination had often misguidedher in, against her honest minded husband, and enflamed with rage,suddenly replied; that shee would doe according as he had advised her,as being a matter of no difficulty. but if he came, she would so shameand dishonour him, as no woman whatsoever should better schoole him.ricciardo highly pleased herewith, and being perswaded, that hispurpose would take the full effect: confirmed the lady in herdetermination with many words more; yet putting her in memory, tokeepe her faithfull promise made, without revealing the matter toany living person, as shee had sworne upon her faith.
on the morrow morning, ricciardo went to an auncient woman of hisacquaintance, who was the mistresse of a bathing-house, and therewhere he had appointed madame catulla, that the bath should beeprepared for her, giving her to understand the whole businesse, anddesiring her to be favourable therein to him. the woman, who had beenemuch beholding to him in other matters, promised very willingly tofulfill his request, concluding with him, both what should be done andsaid. she had in her house a very darke chamber, without any window toaffoord it the least light, which chamber she had made ready,according to ricciardoes direction, with a rich bed thereir, so softand delicate as possible could bee, wherein he entred so soone as hehad dined, to attend the arrivall of madame catulla. on the sameday, as she had heard the speeches of ricciardo, and gave morecredit to them then became her; shee returned home to her house inwonderfull impatience. and philippello her husband came homediscontentedly too, whose head being busied about some worldlyaffaires, perhaps he looked not so pleasantly, neither used her sokindly, as he was wont to doe. which catulla perceiving, shee wasten times more suspicious then before, saying to her selfe. nowapparent trueth doth disclose it selfe, my husbands head is troublednow with nothing else, but ricciardoes wife, with whom (to morrow)he purposeth his meeting; wherein he shall be disappointed, if i live;taking no rest at all the whole night, for thinking how to handleher husband.
what shall i say more? on the morrow, at the houre of mid-dayaccompanied onely with her chamber-mayde, and without any otheralteration in opinion; shee went to the house where the bath waspromised, and meeting there with the olde woman, demaunded of her,if philippello were come thither as yet or no? the woman, being wellinstructed by ricciardo, answered: are you shee that should meetehim heere? yes, replied catulla. goe in then to him (quoth thewoman) for he is not farre off before you.
madame catulla, who went to seeke that which shee would not finde,being brought vailed into the darke chamber where ricciardo was,entred into the bath, hoping to finde none other there but herhusband, and the custome of the country, never disallowed suchmeetings of men with their wives, but held them to be good andcommendable. in a counterfeit voyce he bad her welcome, and she, notseeming to be any other then shee was indeed, entertained hisimbracings in as loving manner; yet not daring to speake, least heshould know her, but suffered him to proceede in his owne errour.
let passe the wanton follies passing betweene them, and come tomadame catulla, who finding it a fit and convenient time, to ventforth the tempest of her spleene, began in this manner. alas! howmighty, are the misfortunes of women, and how ill requited is allthe loyall love of many wives to their husbands? i, a pooremiserable lady, who, for the space of eight yeeres now fullycompleated, have loved thee: more dearely then mine owne life, findenow (to my hearts endlesse griefe) how thou wastest and consumestthy desires, to delight them with a strange woman, like a most vileand wicked man as thou art. with whom doest thou now imagine thy selfeto be? thou art with her, whom thou hast long time deluded by falseblandishments, feigning to affect her, when thou doatest in thydesires else-where. i am thine owne catulla, and not the wife ofricciardo, trayterous and unfaithfull man, as thou art. i am sure thouknowest my voyce, and i thinke it a thousand yeeres, until wee may seeeach other in the light, to doe thee such dishonour as thou justlydeservest, dogged, disdainfull, and villainous wretch. by conceivingto have another woman in thy wanton embraces thou hast declared morejoviall disposition, and demonstrations of farre greater kindnesse,then domesticke familiarity. at home thou lookest sower, sullen orsurly, often froward, and seldome well pleased. but the best is,whereas thou intendest this husbandrie for another mans ground, thouhast (against thy will) bestowed it on thine owne, and the waterhath runne a contrary course, quite from the current where thoumeantst it.
what answer canst thou make, devill, and no man? what, have my wordssmitten thee dumbe? thou mayest (with shame enough) hold thy peace,for with the face of a man, and love of an husband to his wife, thouart not able to make any answere.
ricciardo durst not speake one word, but still expressed his affablebehaviour towards her, bestowing infinite embraces and kisses onher: which so much the more augmented her rage and anger, continuingon her chiding thus. if by these flatteries and idle follies, thouhopest to comfort or pacifie me, thou runnest quite by as from thyreckoning; for i shall never imagine my selfe halfe satisfied,untill in the presence of my parents, friends, and neighbours, ihave revealed thy base behaviour. tell mee, treacherous man, am noti as faire, as the wife of ricciardo? am i not as good a gentlewomanborne, as shee is? what canst thou more respect in her, then is inmee? villaine, monster, why doest thou not answere mee? i will send toricciardo, who loveth mee beyond all other women in naples, and yetcould never vaunt, that i gave him so much as a friendly looke: heshall know, what a dishonour thou hadst intended towards him; whichboth he and his friends will revenge soundly upon thee. theexclamations of the lady were so tedious and irksome, that ricciardoperceiving, if shee continued longer in these complaints, worsewould ensue thereon, then could bee easily remedied: resolved tomake himselfe knowne unto her, to reclaime her out of this violentextasie, and holding her somewhat strictly, to prevent her escapingfrom him, he said. madam, afflict your selfe no further, for, what icould not obtaine by simply loving you, subtilty hath better taughtme, and i am your ricciardo: which she hearing, and perfectlyknowing him by his voyce; shee would have leapt out of the bath, butshee could not, and to avoyde her crying out, he layde his hand on hermouth, saying. lady, what is done, cannot now be undone, albeit youcried out all your life time. if you exclaime, or make this knowneopenly by any meanes; two unavoydable dangers must needes ensuethereon. the one (which you ought more carefully to respect) is thewounding of your good renowne and honour, because, when you shall say,that by treacherie i drew you hither: i will boldly maintaine thecontrary, avouching, that having corrupted you with gold, and notgiving you so much as covetously you desired; you grew offended, andthereon made the outcry, and you are not to learne, that the worldis more easily induced to beleeve the worst, then any goodnesse, be itnever so manifest. next unto this, mortall hatred must arisebetweene your husband and mee, and (perhaps) i shall as soone killhim, as he me; whereby you can hardly, live in any true contentmentafter. wherefore, joy of my life, doe not in one moment, both shameyour selfe, and cause such perill betweene your husband and me: foryou are not the first, neither can be the last, that shall bedeceived. i have not beguiled you, to take any honour from you, butonely declared, the faithfull affection i beare you, and so shalldoe for ever, as being your bounden and most obedient servant; andas it is a long time agoe, since i dedicated my selfe and all mineto your service, so hence-forth must i remaine for ever. you arewise enough (i know) in all other things: then shew your selfe notto be silly or simple in this.
ricciardo uttered these words, teares streaming aboundantly downehis cheekes, and madame catulla (all the while) likewise showred forthher sorrowes equally to his, now, although she was exceedinglytroubled in mind, and saw what her owne jealous folly had nowbrought her to, a shame beyond all other whatsoever: in the middest ofher tormenting passions, shee considered on the words of ricciardo,found good reason in them, in regard of the unavoydable evilswhereupon shee thus spake. ricciardo, i know not how to beare thehorrible injurie, and notorious treason used by thee against me, graceand goodnesse having so forsaken me, to let me fall in so foule amanner. nor becommeth it me, to make any noyse or out-cry heere,whereto simplicity, or rather devillish jealousie, did conduct me. butcertaine i am of one thing, that i shall never see any one joyfullday, till (by one meanes or other) i bee reverged on thee. thou hastglutted thy desire with my disgrace, let me therefore go from thee,never more to looke upon my wronged husband, or let any honest womanever see my face.
ricciardo perceiving the extremity of her perplexed minde, usedall manly and milde perswasions, which possibly he could devise todoe, to turne the torrent of this high tide, to a calmer course; as byoutward shew shee made appearance of, untill (in frightfull fearesshunning every one shee met withall, as arguments of herguiltinesse) shee recovered her owne house, where remorse sotortured her distressed soule, that she fell into so fierce amelancholy, as never left her till shee died. upon the report whereof,ricciardo becomming likewise a widdower, and grievingextraordinarily for his haynous transgression, penitently betookehimselfe to live in a wildernesse, where (not long after) he ended hisdayes.
the third day, the seaventh novell
wherein is signified the power of love, and the diversity of
dangers, whereinto men may dayly fall.
theobaldo elisei, having received an unkinde repulse by his beloved,departed from florence, and returning thither (a long while after)in the habite of a pilgrime; he spake with her, and made his wrongsknowne unto her. he delivered her father from the danger of death,because it was proved, that he had slaine theobaldo: he made peacewith his brethren, and in the end, wisely enjoyed his hearts desire.
so ceased fiammetta her discourse, being generally commended, whenthe queene, to prevent the losse of time, commanded aemillia to follownext, who thus began. it liketh me best (gracious ladies) to returnehome againe to our owne city, which it pleased the for.
mer two discoursers to part from: and there i will shew you, how acitizen of ours, recovered the kindnesse of his love, after hee hadlost it.
sometime there dwelt in florence a young gentleman, namedtheobaido elisei, descended of a noble house, who became earnestlyenamoured of a widdow, called hermelina, the daughter toaldobrandino palermini: well deserving, for his vertues andcommendable qualities, to enjoy of her whatsoever he could desire.secretly they were espoused together, but fortune, the enemy to loversfelicities, opposed her malice against them, in depriving theobaldo ofthose deere delights, which sometime he held in free possession, andmaking him as a stranger to her gracious favours. now grew sheecontemptibly to despise him, not onely denying to heare any messagesent from him, but scorning also to vouch safe so much as a sight ofhim, causing in him extreme griefe and melancholy, yet concealling allher unkindnesse so wisely to himselfe, as no one could understandthe reason of his sadnesse.
after he had laboured by all hopefull courses, to obtaine thatfavour of her, which he had formerly lost, without any offence in him,as his innocent soule truly witnessed with him, and saw that all hisfurther endeavours were fruitlesse and in vaine; he concluded toretreate himselfe from the world, and not to be any longer irkesome inher eye, that was the onely occasion of his unhappinesse. hereupon,storing himselfe with summes of money, as suddenly he could collecttogether, secretly he departed from florence, without speaking anyword to his friends or kindred; except one kinde companion ofhis, whom he acquainted with most of his secrets, and so travelledto ancona, where he termed himselfe by the name of sandoloscio.repairing to a wealthy merchant there, he placed himselfe as hisservant, and went in a ship of his with him to cyprus; his actions andbehaviour proved so pleasing to the merchant, as not onely heallowed him very sufficient wages, but also grew into such associationwith him; as he gave the most of his affaires into his hands, which heguided with such honest and discreete care, that hee himselfe (infew yeeres compasse) proved to be a rich merchant, and of famousreport.
while matters went on in this successefull manner, although he couldnot chuse, but still he remembred his cruell mistresse, and was verydesperately transported for her love, as coveting (above all thingselse) to see her once more; yet was he of such powerfull constancy, as7 whole yeeres together, he vanquished all those fierce conflicts. buton a day it chanced he heard a song sung in cyprus, which hehimselfe had formerly made, in honour of the love he bare to hismistresse, and what delight he conceived, by being dayly in herpresence; whereby he gathered, that it was impossible for him toforget her, and proceeded on so desirously, as he could not live,except he had a sight of her once more, and therefore determined onhis returne to florence. having set all his affaires in due order,accompanied with a servant of his onely, he passed to ancona, wherewhen he was arrived, he sent his merchandises to florence, in nameof the merchant of ancona, who was his especiall friend and partner;travayling himselfe alone with his servant, in the habite of apilgrime, as if he had beene newly returned from jerusalem.
being come to florence, he went to an inne kept by two brethren,neere neighbours to the dwelling of his mistresse, and the first thinghe did, was passing by her doore, to get a sight of her if he wereso happie. but he found the windowes, doores, and all parts of thehouse fast shut up, whereby he suspected her to be dead, or else to bechanged from her dwelling: wherefore (much perplexed in minde) he wenton to the two brothers inne, finding foure persons standing at thegate, attired in mourning, whereat he marvelled not a little;knowing himselfe to be so transfigured, both in body and babite, farrefrom the manner of common use at his parting thence, as it was adifficult matter to know him: he stept boldly to a shooe-makers shopneere adjoyning, and demanded the reason of their wearing mourning.the shooe-maker made answer thus; sir, those men are clad in mourning,because a brother of theirs, being named theobaldo (who hath beeneabsent hence a long while) about some fifteene dayes since was slaine.and they having heard, by proofe made in the court of justice, thatone aldobrandino palermini (who is kept close prisoner) was themurtherer of him, as he came in a disguised habite to his daughter, ofwhom he was most affectionately enamoured; cannot chuse, but let theworld know by their outward habits, the inward affliction of theirhearts, for a deede so dishonourably committed. theobaldo wonderedgreatly hereat, imagining, that some man belike resembling him inshape, might be slaine in this manner, and by aldobrandino, forwhose misfortune he grieved marvellously. as concerning his mistresse,he understood that shee was living, and in good health; and nightdrawing on apace, he went to his lodging, with infinite molestationsin his minde, where after supper, he was lodged in a corne-loft withhis man. now by reason of many disturbing imaginations, whichincessantly wheeled about his braine, his bed also being none of thebest, and his supper (perhaps) somewhat of the coursest; a greatpart of the night was spent, yet could he not close his eyes together.but lying still broade awake, about the dead time of night, he heardthe treading of divers persons over his head, who discended downe apaire of stayres by his chamber, into the lower parts of the house,carrying a light with them, which he discerned by the chinkes andcrannies in the wall. stepping softly out of his bed, to see whatthe meaning hereof might be, he espied a faire young woman, whocarried a light in her hand, and three men in her company,descending downe the stayres together, one of them speaking thus tothe young woman. now we may boldly warrant our saftey, because we haveheard it assuredly, that the death of theobaldo elisei, hath beenesufficiently approved by the brethren, against aldobrandino palermini,and he hath confessed the fact; whereupon the sentence is alreadyset downe in writing. but yet it behooveth us notwithstanding, toconceale it very secretly, because if ever hereafter it should beknowne, that we are they who murthered him, we shall be in the samedanger, as now aldobrandino is.
when theobaldo had heard these words, hee began to consider withhimselfe, how many and great the dangers are, wherewith mens minds maydayly be molested. first, he thought on his owne brethren in theirsorrow, and buried a stranger insteed of him, accusing afterward (byfalse opinion, and upon the testimony of as false witnesses) a manmost innocent, making him ready for the stroke of death. next, he madea strict observation in his soule, concerning the blinded severityof law, and the ministers thereto belonging, who pretending a diligentand carefull inquisition for truth, doe oftentimes (by theirtortures and torments) heare lies avouched (onely for ease of paine)in the place of a true confession, yet thinking themselves (by doingso) to be the ministers of god and justice, whereas indeede they arethe divels executioners of his wickednesse. lastly, converting histhoughts to aldobrandino, the imagined murtherer of a man yetliving, infinite cares beleagured his soule, in devising what mightbest be done for his deliverance.
so soone as he was risen in the morning, leaving his servant behindehim in his lodging, he went (when he thought it fit time) all alonetoward the house of his mistresse, where finding by good fortune thegate open, he entred into a small parlour beneath, and where he sawhis mistresse sitting on the ground, wringing hands, and wofullyweeping, which (in meere compassion) moved him to weepe likewise;and going somewhat neere her, he saide. madame, torment your selfeno more, for your peace is not farre off from you. the gentlewomanhearing him say so, lifted up her head, and in teares spake thus. goodman, thou seemest to me to be a pilgrime stranger; what doest thouknow, either concerning my peace, or mine affliction? madame(replied the pilgrime) i am of constantinople, and (doubtlesse) amconducted hither by the hand of heaven, to convert your teares intorejoycing, and to deliver your father from death. how is this?answered shee: if thou be of constantinople, and art but now arrivedhere; doest thou know who we are, either i, or my father?
the pilgrime discoursed to her, even from the one end to theother, the history of her husbands sad disasters, telling her, howmany yeeres since she was espoused to him, and many other importantmatters, which well shee knew, and was greatly amazed thereat,thinking him verily to be a prophet, and kneeling at his feete,entreated him very earnestly, that if he were come to deliver herfather aldobrandino from death, to doe it speedily, because the timewas very short. the pilgrime appearing to be a man of great holinesse,saide. rise up madame, refraine from weeping, and observeattentively what i shall say; yet with this caution, that you neverreveale it to any person whatsoever. this tribulation whereinto youare falne, (as by revelation i am faithfully informed) is for agrievous sinne by you heretofore committed, whereof divine mercy iswilling to purge you, and to make a perfect amends by a sensiblefeeling of this affliction; as seeking your sound and absoluterecovery, least you fall into farre greater danger then before. goodman (quoth shee) i am burthened with many sinnes, and doe not know forwhich any amends should be made by me; any one sooner then other:wherefore if you have intelligence thereof, for charities sake tell itme, and i will doe so much as lieth in me, to make a full satisfactionfor it. madame, answered the pilgrime, i know well enough what itis, and will demand it no more of you, to winne any furtherknowledge thereof, then i have already: but because in revealing ityour selfe, it may touch you with the more true compunction ofsoule; let us goe to the point indeede, and tell mee, doe youremember, that at any time you were married to an husband, or no?
at the hearing of these words, shee breathed foorth a veryvehement sigh, and was stricken with admiration at this question,beleeving that not any one had knowledge thereof. howbeit, since theday of the supposed theobaldaes buriall, such a rumour ran abroade, bymeanes of some speeches, rashly dispersed by a friend oftheobaldoes, who (indeede) knew it; whereupon shee returned him thisanswer. it appeareth to me (good man) that divine ordinativationhath revealed unto you all the secrets of men; and therefore i amdetermined, not to conceale any of mine from you. true it is, thatin my younger yeeres, being left a widdow, i entirely affected anunfortunate young gentleman, who (in secret) was my husband, and whosedeath is imposed on my father. the death of him i have the morebemoaned, because (in reason) it did neerely concerne me, by shewingmy selfe so savage and rigorous to him before his departure:neverthelesse, let me assure you sir, that neither his parting longabsence from me, or his untimely death, never had the power to bereavemy heart of his remembrance.
madame, saide the pilgrime, the unfortinate young gentleman thatis slaine, did never love you; but sure i am, that theobaldo eliseiloved you deerely. but tell me, what was the occasion whereby youconceived such hatred against him? did he at any time offend you? notruly sir, quoth shee; but the reason of my anger towards him, wasby the words and threatnings of a religious father, to whom once irevealed (under confession) how faithfully i affected him, and whatprivate familiarity had passed betweene us. when iristantly he usedsuch dreadfull threatnings to me, and which (even yet) doe afflictmy soule, that i did not abstaine, and utterly refuse him, thedivell would fetch me quicke to hell, and cast me into the bottomeof his quenchlesse and everlasting fire.
these menaces were so prevailing with me, as i refused all furtherconversition with theobaldo, in which regard, i would receiveneither letters or messages from him. howbeit, i am perswaded, that ifhe had continued here still, and not departed hence in suchdesperate manner as hee did, seeing him melt and consume dayly away,even as snow by power of the sunne-beames: my austere deliberation hadbeene long agoe quite altered, because not at any time (since then)life hath allowed me one merry day, neither did i, or ever can loveany man like unto him.
at these wordes the pilgrime sighed, and then proceeded on againethus. surely madame, this one onely sin, may justly torment you,because i know for a certainty, that theobaldo never offered you anyin many, the day hee first became enamoured of you; and what graceor favour you affoorded him, was your owne voluntary gift, and (ashe tooke it) no more then in modesty might well become you; for heeloving you first, you had beene most cruell and unkinde, if you shouldnot have requited him with the like affection. if then he continued sojust and loyall to you, as (of mine owne knowledge) i am able to sayhe did; what should move you to repulse him so rudely? such mattersought well to bee considered on before hand; for if you did imagine,that you should repent it as an action ill done, yet you could not doeit, because as hee became yours, so were you likewise onely his; andhe being yours, you might dispose of him at your pleasure, as beingtruely obliged to none but you. how could you then with-draw yourselfe from him, being onely his, and not commit most manifest theft, afarre unfitting thing for you to doe, except you had gone with hisconsent.
now madame, let me further give you to understand, that i am areligious person, and a pilgrime, and therefore am well acquaintedwith all the courses of their dealing; if therefore i speakesomewhat more amply of them, and for your good, it can not be sounseeming for mee to doe it, as it would appeare ugly in another. inwhich respect, i will speake the more freely to you, to the ende, thatyou may take better knowledge of them, then (as it seemeth) hithertoyou have done. in former passed times such as professed religion, werelearned and most holy persons; but our religious professours nowadayes, and such as covet to bee so esteemed; have no matter at all ofreligion in them, but onely the outward shew and habite. which yetis no true badge of religion neither, because it was ordained byreligious institutions, that their garments should bee made ofarrow, plaine, and coursest spun cloth, to make a publikemanifestation to the world, that (in meere devotion, and religiousdisposition) by wrapping their bodies in such base clothing, theycondemned and despised all temporall occasions. but now adaies theymake them large, deepe, glistering, and of the finest cloth or stuffesto bee gotten, reducing those habites to so proude and pontificall aforme, that they walke peacock-like, rustling, and strouting with themin the churches; yea, and in open publike places, as if they wereordinary secular persons, to have their pride more notoriouslyobserved. and as the angler bestoweth his best cunning, with oneline and baite to catch many fishes at one strike; even so do thesecounterfeited habit-mongers, by their dissembling and craftydealing, beguile many credulous widdowes: simple women, yea, and menof weake capacity, to credit whatsoever they doe or say, and hereinthey doe most of all exercise themselves.
and to the end, that my speeches may not savor of any untruthagainst them; these men which i speake of, have not any habite atall of religious men, but onely the colour of their garments, andwhereas they in times past, desired nothing more then the salvation ofmens soules; these fresher witted fellowes, covet after women andwealth, and employ all their paines by their whispering confessions,and figures of painted fearefull examples, to affright and terrifieunsetled and weake consciences, by horrible and blasphemousspeeches; yet adding perswasion withall, that their sinnes may bepurged by almes-deedes and masses. to the end, that such as creditthem in these their dayly courses, being guided more by apparance ofdevotion, then any true compunction of heart, to escape severepenances by them enjoyned: may some of them bring bread, otherswine, others coyne, all of them matter of commoditie and benefit,and simply say, these gifts are for the soules of their good friendsdeceased.
i make not any doubt, but almes-deedes and prayers, are very mighty;and prevailing meanes, to appease heavens anger for some sinnescommitted; but if such as bestow them, did either see or know, to whomthey give them: they would more warily keepe them, or else cast thembefore swine, in regard they are altogether so unworthy of them. butcome we now to the case of your ghostly father, crying out in youreare, that secret mariage was a most greevous sinne: is not the breachthereof farre greater? familiar conversation betweene man and manand woman, is a concession meerely naturall: but to rob, kill, orbanish any one, proceedeth from the mindes malignity. that thou didrob theobaldo, your selfe hath already sufficiently witnessed, bytaking that from him, which with free consent in mariage you gave him.next i must say, that by all the power remaining in you, you kild him,because you would not permit him to remaine with you, declaring yourselfe in the very height of cruelty, that hee might destroy his lifeby his owne hands. in which case the law requireth, that whosoeveris the occasion of an ill act committed, hee or she is as deepe in thefault, as the party that did it. now concerning his banishment, andwandring seaven yeeres in exile thorow the world; you cannot denie,but that you were the onely occasion thereof. in all which threeseverall actions, farre more capitally have you offended; then bycontracting of mariage in such clandestine manner.
but let us see, whether theobaldo deserved all these severallcastigations, or not. in trueth he did not, your selfe haveconfessed (beside that which i know) that hee loved you more deerelythen himselfe, and nothing could be more honoured, magnified andexalted, then dayly you were by him, above all other women whatsoever.when hee came in any place, where honestly, and without suspitionhee might speake to you: all his honour, and all his liberty, laywholly committed into your power. was hee not a noble young gentleman?was he (among all those parts that most adorne a man, and appertaineto the very choycest respect) inferiour to any one of best merit inyour citie? i know that you cannot make deniall to any of thesedemands. how could you then by the perswasion of a beast, a foole, avillaine, yea, a vagabond, envying both his happinesse and yours,enter into so cruell a minde against him? i know not what errormisguideth women, in scorning and despising their husbands: but ifthey entred into a better consideration, understanding triely whatthey are, and what nobility of nature god hath endued man withall,farre above all other creatures; it would bee their highest title ofglory, when they are so preciously esteemed of them, so dearelyaffected by them, and so gladly embraced in all their best abilities.
this is so great a sinne, as the divine justice (which in anequall ballance bringeth all operations to their full effect) didnot purpose to leave unpunished; but as you enforced against allreason, to take away theobaldo from your selfe: even so your fatheraldobrandino, without any occasion given by theobaldo, is in perill ofhis life, and you a partaker of his tribulation. out of which if youdesire to be delivered, it is very convenient that you promise onething which i shall tell you, and may much better be by you performed.namely, that if theobaido do returne from his long banishment, youshall restore him to your love, grace, and good acceptation;accounting him in the selfe-same degree of favour and privateentertainment, as he was at the first, before your wicked ghostlyfather so hellishly incensed you against him.
when the pilgrim had finished his speeches, the gentlewoman whohad listned to them very attentively (because all the edged reasonsappeared to be plainly true) became verily perswaded, that all theseafictions had falne on her and her father, for the ingratefull offenceby her committed, and therefore thus is replied. worthy man, and thefriend to goodnesse, i know undoubtedly, that the words which you havespoken are true, and also i understand by your demonstration, whatmanner of people some of those religious persons are, whomheretofore i have reputed to be saints, but find them now to be farotherwise. and to speake truly, i perceive the fault to be great andgreevous, wherein i have offended against theobaldo, and would (if icould) willingly make amends, even in such manner as you have advised.but how is it possible to be done? theobaldo being dead, can be [no]more recalled to this life; and therefore, i know not what promise ishould make, in a matter which is not to bee performed. whereto thepilgrime without any longer pausing, thus answered.
madam, by such revelations as have beene shewne to me, i know fora certainety, that theobaldo is not dead, but living, in health, andin good estate; if he had the fruition of your grace and favour.take heede what you say sir (quoth the gentlewoman) for i saw himlye slain before my doore, his bodie having received many wounds,which i folded in mine armes, and washed his face with my brinishteares; whereby (perhaps) the scandall arose, that flew abroad to mydisgrace. beleeve me madam, replyed the pilgrim, say what you will,i dare assure you that theobaldo is living, and if you dare makepromise, concerning what hath bin formerly requested, and keepe itinviolably, i make no doubt, but you your selfe shall shortly see him.i promise it (quoth she) and binde my selfe thereto by a sacredoath, to keepe it faithfully: for never could any thing happen toyeeld me the like contentment, as to see my father free from danger,and theobaldo living.
at this instant theobaldo thought it to be a very apt and convenienttime to disclose himselfe, and to comfort the lady, with an assuredsignall of hope, for the deliverance of her father, wherefore he said:ladie, to the end that i may comfort you infallibly in thisdangerous perill of your fathers life, i am to make knowne anespeciall secret to you, which you are to keepe carefully (as youtender your owne life) from ever being revealed to the world. theywere then in a place of sufficient privacie, and by themselves,because she reposed great confidence in the pilgrims sanctity or life,as thinking him none other then he seemed to be. theobaldo tooke outof his purse a ring, which she gave him the last night of theirconversing together, and he had kept with no meane care: and shewingit to her, said; do you know this ring madam? so soone as she sawit, immediatly she knew it, and answered, yes sir, i know the ring,and confesse that heretofore i gave it to theobaldo.
heereupon the pilgrime stood up, and sodainly putting off hispoore linnen frock, and the hood from his head, using his florentinetongue, he said; tell me madam, do you not know me? when she hadadvisedly beheld him, and knew him indeed to be theobaldo, she wasstricken into a wonderfull astonishment, being as fearfull of him,as she was of the dead body which she saw lying in the street. and idare assure you, that she durst not go neere him, to respect him astheobaldo lately come from cyprus, but (in terror) fled away from him;as if theobaldo had bin newly risen out of his grave, and came thitherpurposely to affright her; wherefore he said. be not affraid madam,i am your theobaldo, in health, alive, and never as yet died,neither have i received any wounds to kill mee, as you and my brethrenhad formerly imagined.
some better assurance getting possession of her, as knowing himperfectly by his voice, and looking more stedfastly on his face, whichconstantly avouched him to be theobaldo; the teares trickling amainedowne her faire cheekes, she ran to embrace him, casting her armesabout his necke, and kissing him a thousand times, my faithfullhusband, nothing in the world can be so welcom to me. theobaldo havingmost kindly kissed and embraced her, said; sweet wife, time wit notnow allow us those ceremonious courtesies, which (indeed) so long aseparation do justly challenge; for i must about a more weightybusines, to have your father safely delivered, which i hope to dobefore to morow night when you shall heare tydings to your bettercontentment. and questionlesse, if i speed no worse then my goodhope perswadeth me, i will see you againe to night, and acquaint youat better leysure, in such things as i cannot do now at this present.
so putting on his pilgrimes habit againe, kissing her once more, andcomforting her with future good successe, he departed from her,going to the prison where aldobrandino lay, whom hee found morepensive, as being in hourely expectation of death, then any hope hehad to be freed from it. being brought neerer to him by theprisoners favour, as seeming to be a man come onely to comfort him:sitting downe by him, thus he began. aldobrandino, i am a friend ofthine, whom heaven hath sent to doe thee good, in meere pittie andcompassion of thine innocency. and therefore, if thou wilt grant meone small request, which i am earnestly to crave at thy hands, thoushalt heare (without any failing) before to morrow at night, thesentence of thy free absolution, whereas now thou expectest nothingbut death; whereunto aldobrandino thus answered. friendly man,seeing thou art so carefull of my safety (although i know thee not,neither doe remember that ere i saw thee till now) thou must needsbe some especiall kinde friend of mine. and to tell thee the truth,i never committed the sinful deed for which i am condemned to death.true it is, i have other heinous and greevous sins, which(undoubtedly) have throwne. this heavy judgement on me, andtherefore i am the more willing to undergo it. neverthelesse, let methus i us farre assure thee, that i would gladly not onely promisesomething which might be to the glory of god, if he were pleased inthis case to have mercy on me; but also would as willingly performeand accomplish it. wherefore, demaund whatsoever thou pleasest, forunfained (if i escape with life) i will truly keepe promise with thee.
sir, replyed the pilgrime, i desire nor demand any thing of you, butthat you would pardon the foure brethren of theobaldo, that broughtyou to this hard extremity, as thinking you to be guilty of theirbrothers death, and that you would also accept them as your brethrenand friends upon their craving pardon for what they have done.
sir, answered aldobrandino, no man knoweth how sweet revenge is, norwith what heate it is to be desired, but onely the man who hath benewronged. notwithstanding, not to hinder hope, which onely aymeth atheaven, i freely forgive them, and henceforth pardon them for ever,intending more. over, that if mercy give me life, and cleere me fromthis bloody imputation, to love and respect them so long as i shalllive. this answere was most pleasing to the pilgrime, and withoutany further multiplication of speeches, he entreated him to be of goodcomfort, for he feared not but before the time prefixed, he shouldheare certaine tydings of his deliverance.
at his departing from him, hee went directly to the signoria, andprevailed so far that he spake privately with a knight, who was thenone of the states chiefest lords, to whom he saide. sir, a man oughtto bestow his best paines and diligence, that the truth of thingsshould be apparantly knowne, especially, such men as hold the placeand office as you doe: to the end, that those persons which havecommitted no foule offence, should not bee punished, but onely theguilty and haynous transgressors. and because it will be no meanehonor to you, to lay the blame where it worthily deserveth, i amcome hither purposely, to informe you in a case of most weightyimportance. it is not unknowne to you, with what rigour the state hathproceeded against aldobrandino palermini, and you think verily he isthe man that hath slaine theobaldo elisei, whereupon your law hathcondemned him to die. i dare assure you sir, that a very unjust coursehath beene taken in this case, because aldobrandino is falslyaccused as you your selfe will confesse before midnight, when they aredelivered into your power, that were the murderers of the man.
the honest knight, who was very sorrowfull for aldobrandino,gladly gave attention to the pilgrime, and having conferred on manymatters, appertaining to the fact committed: the two brethren who weretheobaldoes hostes, and their chambermaid, upon good advice given,were apprehended in their first sleep, without any resistance madein their defence. but when the tortures were sent for, to understandtruly how the case went, they would not endure any paine at all, buteach aside by himselfe, and then altogether confessed openly, thatthey did the deede, yet not knowing him to be theobaldo elisei. andwhen it was demanded of them, upon what occasion they did so foulean act, they answered, that they were so hatefull against the manslife, because he would luxuriouslie have abused one of their wives,when they both were absent from their owne home.
when the pilgrim had heard their voluntary confession, he tookehis leave of his knight, returning secretly to the house of madamhermelina, and there (because all her people were in their beds) shecarefully awaited his returne, to beare some glad tydings of herfather, and to make a further reconciliation betweene her andtheobaldo, when sitting downe by her, he said: deare love, be ofgood cheere, for (upon my word) to morrow you shall have your fatherhome safe, well, and delivered from all further danger: and toconfirme her the more confidently in his words, he declared at largethe whole carriage of the businesse. hermelina being wondrouslyjoyfull, for two such succesefull accidents to injoy her husband aliveand in health, and also to have her father freed from so great adanger; kissed and embraced him most affectionately, welcomming himlovingly into her bed, whereto so long time hee had beene a stranger.
no sooner did bright day appeare, but theobaldo arose, havingacquainted her with such matters as were to be done, and once moreearnestly desiring her, to conceale (as yet) these occurrences toher selfe. so in his pilgrims habit, he departed from her house, toawaite convenient: opportunity, for attending on the businessebelonging to aldobrandino. at the usuall houre appointed, the lordswere all set in the signioria, and had received full information,concerning the offence imputed to aldobrandino, setting him at libertyby publique consent, and sentencing the other malefactors withdeath, who (within a few dayes after) were beheaded in place themurther was committed. thus aldobrandino being released, to hisexceeding comfort, and no small joy of his daughter, kindred, andfriends, all knowing perfectly, that this had happened by the pilgrimsmeanes, they conducted him home to aldobrandinoes house, where theydesired him to continue so long as himselfe pleased, using him withmost honourable and gracious respect, bilt especially hermelina, whoknew (better then the rest) on whom she bestowed her liberall favours,yet concealing all closely to her selfe. after two or three dayes wereover-past, in these complementall entercoursings of kindnesse,theobaldo began to consider, that it was high time for reconciliation,to be solemnely past betweene his brethren and aldobrandino. for, theywere not a little amazed at his strange deliverance, and went likewisecontinually armed, as standing in feare of aldobrandino and hisfriends; which made him the more earnest, for accomplishment of thepromise formerly made unto him. aldobrandino lovingly replied, that hewas ready to make good his word. whereupon, the pilgrime provided agoodly banquet, whereat he pursued to have present aldobrandino, hisdaughter, kindred, and their wives. but first, himselfe went inperson, to invite them in peace to his banquet, using many pregnantand forcible reasons to them, such as are requisite in the likediscordant cases. in the end, they were so wise and prevailing withthem that they willingly condiscended, and thought it no disparagementunto them, for the recovery of aldobrandinoes kindnesse againe, tocrave pardon for their great error committed. on the morrow following,about dinner time, the foure brethren of theobaldo, attired in theirmourning garments, with their wives and frends came first to the houseof aldobrandino, who purposely stayed for them; and having laiddowne their weapons on the ground, in the presence of all such asaldobrandino had invited as his witnesses, they offered themselvesto his mercy, and humbly required pardon of him, for the matterwherein they had offended him. aldobrandino shedding teares, mostlovingly embraced them, and (to be briefe) pardoned whatsoeverinjuries he had received. after this, the sisters and wives, allclad in mourning, courteously submitted themselves, and weregraciously welcommed by madame hermelina, as also divers othergentlewomen there present with her. being all seated at the tables,which were furnished with such rarities as could be wished for; althings else deserved their due commendation, but onely sad silence,occasioned by the fresh remembrance of sorow, appearing in the habitesof theobaldoes friends and kindred, which the pilgrim himselfe plainlyperceived, to be the onely disgrace to him and his feast. wherefore,as before he had resolved, when time served to purge away thismelancholly, he arose from the table, when some (as yet) had scarsebegun to eate, and thus spake.
gracious company, there is no defect in this banquet, or more debarsit of the honour it might else have, but onely the presence oftheobaldo, who having bin continually in your company, it seemes youare not willing to take knowledge of him, and therefore i meane myselfe to shew him. so, uncasing himselfe out of his pilgrimes clothes,and standing in his hose and doublet, to their no little admiration,they all knew him, yet doubted whether it were he, or no. which heperceiving, he repeated his brethrens and absent kindreds names, andwhat occurrences hapned betweene them from time to time, beside therelation of his owne passed fortunes, inciting teares in the eyes ofhis brethren, and all else there present, every one hugging andembracing him, yea, many beside, who were no kin at all to him.hermelina onely excepted: which when aldobrandino saw, he said untoher; how now hermelina? why doest thou not welcome home theobaldo,so kindly as the rest have done?
she making a modest courtesie to her father, and answering soloude as every one might her, there is not any one in this assemblythat more willingly would give him all expression of a joyfullwelcom home and thankefull gratitude for such especiall favoursreceived, then in my heart i could affoord to do, but onely inregard of those infamous speeches noysed out against me, on the daywhen we wept for him, who was supposed to be theobaldo, whichslander was to my great discredit. go on boldly, replied aldobrandino,doest thou think that i regard any such praters? in the procuring ofmy deliverance, he hath approved them to be manifest lyars, albeit imy selfe did never credit them. go then i command thee, and- let mesee thee both kisse and embrace him. she who desired nothing more,shewed her selfe not sloth full in obeying her father to do but herduty to her husband. wherefore being risen, as all the rest haddone, but yet in farre more effectuall manner, she declared herunfained love to theobaldo. these bountifull favours ofaldobrandino, were joyfully accepted by theobaldoes brethren, asalso to every one there present; so that all former rancour and hatredwhich had caused heavie variances betweene them, was now convertedto mutuall kindnesse and solemne friendship on every side.
when the feasting dayes were finished, the garments of sadmourning were quite laid aside, and those (becomming so generall ajoy) put on, to make their hearts and habites suteable. now,concerning the man slaine, and supposed to be theobaldo, hee wasone, that in all parts of body, and truenesse of complexion so neerelyresembled him, as theobaldoes owne brethren could not distinguishthe one from the other: but hee was of lunigiana, named fatinolo,and not theobaldo, whom the two brethren inne-keepers maliced, aboutsome idle suspition conceived, and having slaine him, layde his bodyat the doore of aldobrandino, where by reason of theobaldoesabsence, it was generally reputed to be hee, and aldobrandinocharged to doe the deede, by vehement perswasion of the brethren,knowing what love had passed betweene him and his daughterhermelina. but happy was the pilgrims returne, first to heare thosewords in the inne, the meanes to bring the murther to light, andthen the discreet carriage of the pilgrime, untill he plainly approvedhimselfe, to bee truely theobaldo.
the third day, the eight novell
wherein is displayed, the apparant folly of jealousie: and the
subtility of some religious carnall minded men, to
beguile silly and simple maried men
ferando, by drinking a certaine kinde of powder, was buried dead.and by the abbot, who was enamored of his wife, was taken out of hisgrave, and put into a darke prison, where they made him beleeve,that hee was in purgatorie. afterward, when time came that heeshould be, raised to life againe; he was made to keepe a childewhich the abbot had got by his wife.
when the long discourse of madame emilia was ended, notdispleasing to any, in regard of the length, but rather held tooshort, because no exceptions could bee taken against it, comparing theraritie of the accidents, and changes together: the queene turned tomadame lauretto, giving her such a manifest signe, as she knew, thatit was her turne to follow next, and therefore shee tooke occasionto begin thus. faire ladies, i intend to tell you a tale of trueth,which (perhaps) in your opinions, will seeme to sound like a lye:and yet i heard by the very last relation, that a dead man was weptand mournd for, in sted of another being then alive. in which respect,i am now to let you know, how a living man was buried for dead, andbeing raised againe, yet not as living, himselfe, and divers morebeside, did beleeve that he came forth of his grave, and adored him asa saint, who was the occasion thereof, and who (as a bad man.)deserved justly to be condemned.
in tuscanie there was sometime an abbey, seated, as now we seecommonly they are, in a place not much frequented with people, andthereof a monke was abbot, very holy and curious in all things else,save onely a wanton appetite to women: which yet he kept so cleanly tohimselfe, that though some did suspect it, yet it was knowne to veryfew. it came to passe, that a rich country franklin, named ferando,dwelt as neere neighbour to the said abby, he being a man materiall,of simple and grosse understanding, yet he fell into great familiaritywith the abbot; who made use of this friendly conversation to no otherend, but for divers times of recreation; when he delighted to smile athis silly and sottish behaviour.
upon this his private frequentation with the abbot, at last heobserved, that ferando had a very beautifull woman to his wife, withwhom he grew so deeply in love, as he had no other meditationseither by day or night, but how to become acceptable in her favour.neverthelesse, he concealed his amorous passions privately tohimselfe, and could plainely perceive, that although ferando (in allthings else) was meerely a simple fellow, and more like an idiot, thenof any sensible apprehension: yet was he wise enough in loving hiswife, keeping her carfully out of all company, as one (indeede) veryjealous, least any should kisse her, but onely himselfe, which drovethe abbot into despaire, for ever attaining the issue of his desire.yet being subtill, crafty, and cautelous, he wrought so on theflexible nature of ferando, that hee brought his wife with himdivers dayes to the monasterie; where they walked in the goodlygarden, discoursing on the beatitudes of eternall life, as also themost holy deedes of men and women, long since departed out of thislife, in mervailous civill and modest manner. yet all these were buttraines to a further intention, for the abbot must needes be herghostly father, and she come to be confessed by him; which the fooleferando tooke as an especiall favour, and therefore he gave hisconsent the sooner.
at the appointed time, when the woman came to confession to theabbot, and was on her knees before him, to his no small contentment,before she would say any thing else, thus she began: sacred father, ifgod had not given me such an husband as i have, or else had bestowedon me none at all; i might have beene so happy, by the meanes ofyour holy doctrine, very easily to have entred into the way, whereofyou spake the other day, which leadeth to eternall life. but when iconsider with my selfe, what manner of man ferando is, and thinke uponhis folly withall; i may well terme my selfe to be a widow, although iam a maried wife, because while he liveth, i cannot have any otherhusband. and yet (as sottish as you see him) he is (without anyoccasion given him) so extreamely jealous of me; as i am not able tolive with him, but only in continuall tribulation and hearts griefe.in which respect, before i enter into confession, i most humblybeseech you, that you would vouchsafe (in this distresse) to assist mewith your fatherly advice and counsell, because, if thereby i cannotattaine to a more pleasing kinde of happinesse; neither confessior, orany thing else, is able to doe me any good at all.
these words were not a little welcome to my lord abbot, because(thereby) he halfe assured himselfe, that fortune had laid open thepath to his hoped pleasures. whereupon he said. deare daughter, i makeno question to the contrary, but it must needes be an exceedinginfelicity, to so faire and goodly a young woman as you are, to beplagued with so sottish an husband, brainsick, and without the useof common understanding; but yet subject to a more hellishaffliction then all these, namely jealousie, and therefore you beingin this wofull manner tormented, your tribulations are not only somuch the more credited, but also as amply grieved for, and pittied. inwhich heavy and irksome perturbations, i see not any meanes of remedy,but onely one, being a kinde of physicke (beyond all other) to curehim of his foolish jealousie; which medicine is very familiar to me,because i know best how to compound it, alwayes provided, that you canbe of so strong a capacity, as to be secret in what i shall say untoyou.
good father (answered the woman) never make you any doubt thereof,for i would rather endure death it selfe, then disclose any thingwhich you enjoyne me to keepe secret: wherefore, i beseech you sirto tell me, how, and by what meanes it may be done. if (quoth theabbot) you desire to have him perfectly cured, of disease so dangerousand offensive, of necessity he must be sent into purgatory. how maythat be done, saide the woman, he being alive? he must needs die,answered the abbot, for his more speedy passage thither; and when hehath endured so much punishment, as may expiate the quality of hisjealousie, we have certaine devoute and zealous prayers, whereby tobring him backe againe to life, in as able manner as ever he was.why then, replyed the woman, i must remaine in the state of awiddow? very true, saide the abbot, for a certaine time, in allwhich space, you may not (by no meanes) marrie againe, because theheavens will therewith be highly offended: but ferando beingreturned to life againe, you must repossesse him as your husband,but never to be jealous any more. alas sir (quoth the woman) so thathe may be cured of his wicked jealousie, and i no longer live insuch an hellish imprisonment, do as you please.
now was the abbot (well neere) on the highest step of his hope,making her constant promise, to accomplish it: but (quoth he) whatshall be my recompence when i have done it? father, saide she,whatsoever you please to aske, if it remaine within the compasse of mypower: but you being such a vertuous and sanctified man, and i a womanof so meane worth or merit; what sufficient recompence can i be ableto make you? whereunto the abbot thus replyed. faire woman, you areable to do as much for me, as i am for you, because i doe dispose myselfe, to performe a matter for your comfort and consolation, evenso ought you to be as mindfull of me, in any action concerning my lifeand welfare. in any such matter sir (quoth she) depending on yourbenefit so strictly, you may safely presume to command me. you mustthen (saide the abbot) grant me your love, and the kinde embracingof your person; because so violent are mine affections, as i pineand consume away daily, till i enjoy the fruition of my desires, andnone can helpe me therein but you.when the woman heard these words, as one confounded with muchamazement, thus shee replied. alas, holy father! what a strange motionhave you made to me? i beleeved very faithfully, that you were nolesse then a saint, and is it convenient, that when silly women cometo ask counsell of such sanctified men, they should returne themsuch unfitting answeres? be not amazed good woman, saide the abbot, atthe motion which i have made unto you, because holinesse is notthereby impaired a jot in me; for it is the inhabitant of the soule,the other is an imperfection attending on the body: but be itwhatsoever, your beauty hath so powerfully prevailed on me, thatentire love hath compelld me to let you know it. and more may youboast of your beauty, then any that ever i beheld before, considering,it is so pleasing to a sanctified man, that it can draw him fromdivine contemplations, to regard a matter of so humble an equalitie.
let me tell you moreover, woorthy woman, that see me reverenced hereas lord abbot, yet am i but as other men are, and in regard i amneither aged, nor mishapen, me thinkes the motion i have made,should be the lesse offensive to you, and therefore the soonergranted. for, all the while as ferando remaineth in purgatory, doe youbut imagine him to be present with you, and your perswasion will themore absolutely be confirmed. no man can, or shall be privy to ourclose meetings, for i carry the same holy opinion among all men, asyou your selfe conceived of me, and none dare be so saucie, as to callin question whatsoever i doe or say, because my words are oracles, andmine actions more than halfe miracles; doe you not then refuse sogracious an offer. enow there are, who would gladly enjoy that,which is francke and freely presented to you, and which (if you be awise woman) is meerely impossible for you to refuse. richly am ipossessed of gold and jewels, which shall be all yours, if youplease in favour to be mine, wherein i will not be gaine-saide, exceptyour selfe do deny me.
the woman having her eyes fixed on the ground, knew not well howshee should denie him; and yet in plaine words, to say shee consented,shee held it to be overbase and immodest, and ill agreeing with herformer reputation: when the abbot had well noted this attention inher, and how silent shee stood without returning any answere; heaccounted the conquest to be more then halfe his owne: so thatcontinuing on his former perswasions, hee never ceased, but alluredher still to beleeve whatsoever he saide. and much ashamed of hisimportunity, but more of her owne flexible yeelding weaknesse, madeanswere, that shee would willingly accomplish his request; which yetshee did not absolutely grant, untill ferando were first sent intopurgatory. and till then (quoth the abbot) i will not urge any more,because i purpose his speedy sending thither: but yet, so farre lendme your assistance, that either to morrow, or else the next day, hemay come hither once more to converse with me. so putting a faire goldring on her finger, they parted till the next meeting.
not a little joyfull was the woman of so rich a gift, hoping toenjoy a great many more of them, and returning home to her neighbours,acquainted them with wonderfull matters, all concerning thesanctimonious life of the abbot, a meere miracle of men, and worthy tobe truely termed a saint. within two dayes after, ferando went tothe abbey againe, and so soone as the abbot espyed him, he presentlyprepared for his sending of him into purgatorie. he never waswithout a certaine kinde of drugge, which being beaten into powder,would worke so powerfully upon the braine, and all the other vitallsenses, as to entrance them with a deadly sleepe, and deprive themof all motion, either in the pulses, or in any other part else, evenas if the body were dead indeede; in which operation, it would so holdand continue, according to the quantity given and drunke, as itpreased the abbot to order the matter. this powder or drugge, was senthim by a great prince of the east, and therewith he wrought wondersupon his novices, sending them into purgatory when he pleased, andby such punishments as he inflicted on them there, made them (likecredulous asses) believe whatsoever himselfe listed.
so much of this powder had the abbot provided, as should suffice forthree dayes entrancing, and having compounded it with a verypleasant wine, calling ferando into his chamber, there gave it himto drinke, and afterward walked with him about the cloyster, in veryfriendly conference together, the silly sot never dreaming on thetreachery intended against him. many monkes beside were recreatingthemselves in the cloyster, most of them delighting to behold thefollies of ferando, on whom the potion beganne so to worke, that heslept in walking, nodding and reeling as hee went, till at the last hefell downe, as if he had bene dead.
the abbot pretending great admiration at this accident, called hismonkes about him, all labouring by rubbing his temples, throwingcold water and vinegar in his face, to revive him againe; alleagingthat some fume or vapour in the stomacke, had thus over-awed hisunderstanding faculties, and quite deprived him of life indeede. atlength, when by tasting the pulse, and all their best employed paines,they saw that their labour was spent in vaine; the abbot used suchperswasions to the monkes, that they all beleeved him to be dead:whereupon they sent for his wife and friends, who crediting as much asthe rest did, were very sad and sorrowfull for him.
the abbot (cloathed as he was) laide him in a hollow vault under atombe, such as there are used instead of graves; his wife returninghome againe to her house, with a young sonne which shee had by herhusband, protesting to keepe still within her house, and never more tobe seene in any company, but onely to attend her young sonne, and bevery carefull of such wealth as her husband had left unto her.from the city of bologna, that very instant day, a well staide andgoverned monke there arrived, who was a neere kinsman to the abbot,and one whom he might securely trust. in the dead time of the night,the abbot and this monke arose, and taking ferando out of the vault,carried him into a darke dungeon or prison, which he termed by thename of purgatory, and where hee used to discipline his monkes, whenthey had committed any notorious offence, deserving to be punishedin purgatory. there they tooke off all his usuall wearing garments,and cloathed him in the habite of a monke, even as if he had beene oneof the house; and laying him m a bundle of straw, so left him untillhis senses should be restored againe. on the day following, late inthe evening, the abbot, accompanied with his trusty monke, (by wayof visitation) went to see and comfort the supposed widow, finding herattired in blacke, very sad and pensive, which by his wontedperswasions, indifferently he appeased; challenging the benefit ofpromise. shee being thus alone, not hindered by her husbandsjealousie, and espying another goodly gold ring on his finger, howfrailety and folly over-ruled her, i know not, shee was a weake woman,he a divelish deluding man; and the strongest holdes by over longbattery and besieging, must needs yeeld at the last, as i feare sheedid: for very often afterward, the abbot used in this manner tovisit her, and the simple ignorant country people, carrying no suchill opinion of the holy abbot, and having- seene ferando lying fordead in the vault, and also in the habite of a monke; were verilyperswaded, that when they saw the abbot passe by to and fro, butmost commonly in the night season, it was the ghost of ferando, whowalked in this manner after his death, as a just pennance for hisjealousie.
when ferandoes senses were recovered againe, and he found himselfeto be in such a darkesome place; not knowing where he was, hebeganne to crie and make a noyse. when presently the monke ofbologna (according as the abbot had tutored him) stept into thedungeon, carrying a little waxe candle in the one hand, and a smartingwhip in the other, going to ferando, he stript off his cloathes, andbegan to lash him very soundly. ferando roaring and crying, couldsay nothing else, but where am i? the monke (with a dreadfull voyce)replyed: thou art in purgatory. how? saide ferando; what? am i dead?thou art dead (quoth the monke) and began to lash him lustilyagaine. poore ferando, crying out for his wife and little sonne,demanded a number of idle questions, whereto the monke still fittedhim with as fantasticke answers. within a while after, he set bothfoode and wine before him, which when ferando saw, he saide; how isthis? doe dead men eate and drinke? yes, replyed the monke, and thisfoode which here thou seest, thy wife brought hither to the churchthis morning, to have masses devoutly sung for thy soule, and as toother, so must it be set before thee, for such is the command of thepatrone of this place.
ferando having lyen entranced three dayes and three nights, felt hisstomacke well prepared to eate, and feeding very heartily, stillsaide; o my good wife, o my loving wife, long mayest thou live forthis extraordinary kindnesse. i promise thee (sweete heart) while iwas alive, i cannot remember, that ever any foode and wine was halfeso pleasing to me. o my deare wife; o my hony wife. canst thou(quoth the monke) prayse and commend her now, using her sovillainously in thy life time? then did he whip him more fiercely thenbefore, when ferando holding up his hands, as craving for mercy,demanded wherefore he was so severely punished? i am so commanded(quoth the monke) by supreme power, and twice every day must thou bethus disciplinde. upon what occasion? replyed ferando. because(quoth the monke) thou wast most notoriously jealous of thy wife, sheebeing the very kindest woman to thee, as all the countrey containethnot her equall. it is too true, answered ferando, i was over-muchjealous of her indeede: but had i knowne, that jealousie was such ahatefull sinne against heaven, i never would have offended therein.
now (quoth the monke) thou canst confesse thine owne wilfull follie,but this should have beene thought on before, and whilest thou wastliving in the world. but if the fates vouchsafe to favour thee somuch, as hereafter to send thee to the world once more; remember thypunishment here in purgatory, and sinne no more in that foule sinne ofjealousie. i pray you sir tell me, replyed ferando, after men aredead, and put into purgatory, is there any hope of their ever visitingthe world any more? yes, saide the monke, if the fury of the fatesbe once appeased. o that i knew (quoth ferando) by what meanes theywould be appeased, and let me visite the world on againe: i would bethe best husband that ever lived, and never more be jealous, neverwrong so good a wife, nor ever use one unkind word against her. in themeane while, and till their anger may be qualified; when next mywife doth send me food, i pray you worke so much, that some candlesmay be sent me also, because i live here in uncomfortabledarkenesse; and what should i doe with food, if i have no light.shee sends lights enow, answered the monke, but they are burnt outon the altar in masse-time, and thou canst have none other here, butsuch as i must bring my selfe; neither are they allowed, but onely forthe time of thy feeding and correcting.
ferando breathing foorth a vehement sigh, desired to know what hewas, being thus appointed to punish him in purgatory? i am (quoththe monke) a dead man, as thou art, borne in sardignia, where i serveda very jealous master; and because: i soothed him in his jealousie,i had this pennance imposed on me, to serve thee here in purgatorywith meate and drinke, and (twice every day) to discipline thy body,untill the fates have otherwise determined both for thee and me.why? saide ferando, are any other persons here, beside you and i? manythousands, replyed the monke, whom thou canst neither heare nor see,no more then they are able to doe the like by us. but how farre, saideferando, is purgatory distant from our native countries? about somefifty thousand leagues, answered the monke; but yet passable in amoment, whensoever the offended fates are pleased: and many masses aredally saide for thy soule, at the earnest entreaty of thy wife, inhope of thy conversion; and becomming a new man, hating to bejealous any more hereafter.
in these and such like speeches, as thus they beguiled the time,so did they observe it for a dayly course, sometime discipling,other whiles eating and drinking, for the space of ten whole monethstogether: in the which time, the abbot sildome failed to visiteferandoes wife, without the least suspition in any of theneighbours, by reason of their setled opinion, concerning thenightly walking ferandoes ghost. but, as all pleasures cannot beeexempted from some following paine or other, so it came to passe, thatferandoes wife proved to be conceived with childe, and the time wasdrawing on for her deliverance. now began the abbot to consider,that ferandoes folly was sufficiently chastised, and he had beene longenough in purgatory: wherefore, the better to countenance all passedinconveniences, it was now thought high time, that ferando should besent to the world againe, and set free from the paines of purgatory,as having payed for his jealousie dearely, to teach him betterwisedome hereafter.
late in the dead time of the night, the abbot himselfe entred intothe darke dungeon, and in an hollow counterfeited voyce, called toferando, saying. comfort thy selfe ferando, for the fates are nowpleased, that thou shalt bee released out of purgatory, and sent tolive in the world againe. thou didst leave thy wife newly conceivedwith childe, and this very morning she is delivered of a goodly sonne,whom thou shalt cause to be named bennet: because, by the incessantprayers of the holy abbot, thine owne loving wife, and for sweet saintbennets sake, this grace and favour is afforded thee. ferandohearing this, was exceeding joyfull, and returned this answere: forever honored be the fates, the holy lord abbot, blessed saintbennet, and my most dearely beloved wife, whom i will faithfullylove for ever, and never more offend her by any jealous in me.
when the next foode was sent to ferando, so much of the powder wasmingled with the wine, as would serve onely for foure houresentrauncing, in which time, they clothed him in his owne wearingapparell againe, the abbot himselfe in person, and his honest trustymonke of bologna, conveying and laying him in the same vault under thetombe, where at the first they gave him buriall. the next morningfollowing, the breake of day, ferando recovered his senses, and thorowdivers chinkes and crannies of the tombe, descried daylight, which heehad not see in tenne moneths space before. perceiving then plainely,that he was alive, he cryed out aloude, saying: open, open, and letmee forth of purgatory, for i have beene heere long enough inconscience. thrusting up his head against the cover of the tombe,which was not of any great strength, neither well closed together; heeput it quite off the tombe, and so got forth upon his feete: atwhich instant time, the monks having ended their morning mattins,and hearing the noyse, ran in hast thither, and knowing the voyce offerando, saw that he was come forth of the monument.
some of them were ancient signiors of the house, and yet but meerenovices (as all the rest were) in these cunning and politiquestratagems of the lord abbot, when hee intended to punish any one inpurgatory: and therefore, being affrighted, and amazed at this rareaccident; they fled away from him, running to the abbot, who makinga shew to them, as if he were but new come forth of his oratory, ina kinde of pacifying speeches, saide; peace my deare sonnes, be notaffraide, but fetch the crosse and holy-water hither; then followme, and i will shew you, what miracles the fates have pleased toshew in our convent, therefore be silent, and make no more noise;all which was performed according to his command.
ferando looking leane and pale, as one, that in so long time haddenot seene the light of heaven, and endured such strict disciplinetwice every day: stood in a gastly amazement by the tombesside, as notdaring to adventure any further, or knowing perfectly, whether hewas (as yet) truly alive, or no. but when he saw the monkes andabbot comming, with their lighted torches, and singing in a solemnemanner of procession, he humbled himselfe at the abbots feete, saying.holy father, by your zealous prayers (as hath bin miraculouslyrevealed to me) and the prayers of blessed s. bennet; as also of myhonest, deare, and loving wife, i have bin delivered from the painesof purgatory, and brought againe to live in this world; for whichunspeakable grace and favour, most humbly i thanke the well-pleasedfates, s. bennet, your father-hood, and my kinde wife, and willremember all your loves to me for ever. blessed be the fates, answeredthe abbot, for working so great a wonder heere in our monastery. gothen my good son, seeing the fates have bin so gracious to thee; go (isay) home to thine owne house, and comfort thy kind wife, who eversince thy departure out of this life, hath lived in continuallmourning, love, cherish, and make much of her, never afflicting herhenceforth with causlesse jealousie. no i warrant you good father,replyed ferando; i have bin well whipt in purgatory for such folly,and therefore i might be called a starke foole, if i should that wayoffend any more, either my loving wife, or any other.
the abbot causing miserere to be devoutly sung, sprinkling ferandowell with holy-water, and placing a lighted taper in his hand, senthim home so to his owne dwelling village: where when the neighboursbeheld him, as people halfe frighted out of their wits, they fled awayfrom him, so scared and terrified, as if they had seene some dreadfullsight, or gastly apporition; his wife being as fearfull of him, as anyof the rest. he called to them kindly by their severall names, tellingthem, that he was newly risen out of his grave, and was a man as hehad bin before. then they began to touch and feele him, growing intomore certaine assurance of him, perceiving him to be a living manindeede: whereupon they demanded many questions of him; and id as ifhe were become farre wiser then before, told them tydings, fromtheir long deceased kindred and friends, as if he had met with themall in purgatory, reporting a thousand lyes and fables to them,which (neverthelesse) they beleeved.
then he told them what the miraculous voice had said unto him,concerning the birth of another young sonne, whom (according as he wascommanded) he caused to be named bennet ferando. thus his returne tolife againe, and the daily wonders reported by him, caused no meaneadmiration in the people, with much commendation of the abbotsholinesse, and ferandoes happy curing his jealousie.
the third day, the ninth novell
commending the good judgement and understanding in ladies or
gentlewomen, that are of a quicke and apprehensive spirit
juliet of narbona, cured the king of france of a daungerous fistula,in recompence whereof, she requested to enjoy as her husband inmarriage, bertrand count of roussilion. hee having married her againsthis will, as utterly despising her, went to florence, where hee madelove to a young gentlewoman. juliet, by a queint and cunning policy,compassed the meanes (insted of his chosen new friend) to lye with herowne husband, by whom shee conceived, and had two sonnes; whichbeing afterward made knowne unto count bertrand, he accepted herinto his favour againe, and loved her as his loyall and honourablewife.
now there remained no more (to preserve the priviledge granted todioneus uninfringed) but the queene onely, to declare her novell.wherefore, when the discourse of madam lauretta was ended, withoutattending any motion to bee made for her next succeeding, with agracious and pleasing disposition, thus she began to speake. who shalltell any tale heereafter, to carry any hope or expectation of aliking, having heard the rare and wittie discourse of madame lauretta?beleeve me, it was very advantageable to us all, that she was not thisdayes first beginner, because few or none would have had any courageto follow after her; and therefore the rest yet remaining, are themore to be feared and suspected. neverthelesse, to avoid the breach oforder, and to claime no priviledge by my place, of not performing whati ought to do: prove as it may, a tale you must have, and thus iproceed.
there lived sometime in the kingdome of france, a gentleman namedisnarde, being the count of roussillion: who because hee wascontinually weake, crazie, and sickly, kept a physitian daily in hishouse, who was called master gerard of narbona. count isnarde hadone onely sonne, very young in yeares, yet of towardly hope, faire,comely, and of pleasing person, named bertrand; with whom, manyother children of his age, had their education: and among them, adaughter of the fore-named physitian, called juliet; who, even inthese tender yeares, fixed her affection upon young bertrand, withsuch an earnest and intimate resolution, as was most admirable in soyong a maiden, and more then many times is noted in yeares ofgreater discretion. old count isnarde dying, young bertrand fell asa ward to the king, and being sent to paris, remained there underhis royall custodie and protection, to no little discomfort of youngjuliet, who became greevously afflicted in minde, because she had lostthe company of bertrand.
within some few yeares after, the physitian her father also dyed,and then her desires grew wholly addicted, to visite paris her selfein person, onely because she would see the young count, awaiting buttime and opportunitie, to fit her stolne journey thither. but herkindred and friends, to whose care and trust she was committed, inregard of her rich dowrie, and being left as a fatherlesse orphane:were so circumspect of her walks and daily behaviour, as she could notcompasse any meane; of escaping. her yeares made her now almost fitfor marriage, which so much more encreased her love to the count,making refusall of many woorthy husbands, and laboured by themotions of her friends and kindred, yet all denyed, they not knowingany reason for her refusalles. by this time the count was become agallant goodly gentleman, and able to make election of his wife,whereby her affections were the more violently enflamed, as fearingleast some other should be preferred before her, and so her hopes beutterly disappointed.
it was noysed abroad by common report, that the king of francewas in a very dangerous condition, by reason of a strange swellingon his stomacke, which failing of apt and convenient curing, becamea fistula, afflicting him daily with extraordinary paine andanguish, no chirurgeon or physitian being found, that could ministerany hope of healing, but rather encreased the greefe, and drove itto more vehement extreamitie, compelling the king, as dispairingutterly of all helpe, to give over any further counsell or advice.heereof faire juliet was wondrously joyfull, as hoping that thisaccident would prove the meanes, not onely of her journey to paris,but if the disease were no more then she imagined; she could easilycure it, and thereby compasse count bertrand to be her husband.hereupon, quickning up her wits, with remembrance of those rules ofart, which (by long practise and experience) she had learned of herskilfull father, she compounded certaine hearbes together, such as sheknew fitting for that kinde of infirmity, and having reduced hercompound into powder, away she rode forthwith to paris.
being there arrived, all other serious matters set aside, firstshee must needs have a sight of count bertrand, as being the onelysaint that caused her pilgrimage. next she made meanes for her accesseto the king, humbly entreating his majesty, to vouchsafe her the sightof his fistula. when the king saw her, her modest lookes didplainely deliver, that she was a faire, comely, and discreete younggentlewoman; wherefore, he would no longer hide it, but layed itopen to her view. when shee had seene and felt it, presently she putthe king in comfort; affirming, that she knew her selfe able to curehis fistula, saying: sir, if your highnesse will referre the matter tome, without any perill of life, or any the least paine to your person,i hope (by the helpe of heaven) to make you whole and sound withineight dayes space. the king hearing her words, beganne merrily tosmile at her, saying: how is it possible for thee, being a yongmaiden, to do that which the best physitians in europe, are not ableto performe? i commend thy kindnesse, and will not remaineunthankefull for thy forward willingnesse: but i am fullydetermined, to use no more counsell, or to make any further triallof physicke or chirurgery. whereto faire juliet thus replyed: greatking, let not my skill and experience be despised, because i am young,and a maiden; for my profession is not physicke, neither do iundertake the ministering thereof, as depending on mine owneknowledge; but by the gracious assistance of heaven, and some rules ofskilfull observation, which i learned of reverend gerard of narbonawho was my worthy father, and a physitian of no meane fame, all thewhile he lived.
at the hearing of these words, the king began somewhat to admireat her gracious carriage, and saide within himselfe. what know i,whether this virgin is sent to me by the direction of heaven, or no?why should i disdaine to make proofe of her skill? her promise is,to cure me in a small times compasse, and without any paine oraffliction to me: she shall not come so farre, to returne againewith the losse of he labour, i am resolved to try her cunning, andthereon saide. faire virgin, if you cause me to breake my setleddetermination, and faile of curing me, what can you expect to followthereon? whatsoever great king (quoth she) shall please you. let me bestrongly guarded, yet not hindered, when i am to prosecute thebusinesse: and then if i do not perfectly heale you within eightdaies, let a good fire be made, and therein consume my body untoashes. but if i accomplish the cure, and set your highnesse freefrom all further greevance, what recompence then shall remaine to me?
much did the king commend the confident perswasion which she hadof her owne power, and presently replyed. faire beauty (quoth he) inregard that thou art a maide and unmaried, if thou keepe promise,and i finde my selfe to be fully cured: i will match thee with somesuch gentleman in marriage, as shall be of honourable and worthyreputation, with a sufficient dowry beside. my gracious soveraignesaide she, willing am i, and most heirtily thankfull withall, thatyour highnesse shall bestow me in marriage: but i desire then, to havesuch a husband, as i shall desire or demand by your gracious favour,without presuming to crave any of your sonnes, kindred, or alliance,or appertaining unto your royal blood. whereto the king gladlygranted. young juliet began to minister her physicke, and within fewerdayes then her limited time, the king was sound and perfectly cured;which when he perceived, he saide unto her. trust me vertuous mayde,most woorthily hast thou wonne a husband, name him, and thou shalthave him. royall king (quoth she) then have i won the count bertrandof roussillion, whom i have most entirely loved from mine infancy, andcannot (in my soule) affect any other. very loath was the king togrant her the young count, but in regard of his solemne passedpromise, and his royal word engaged, which he would not by anymeanes breake; he commanded, that the count should be sent for, andspake thus to him. noble count, it is not unknowne to us, that you area gentleman of great honour, and it is our royall pleasure, todischarge your wardship, that you may repaire home to your owne house,there to settle your affaires in such order, as you may be the readierto enjoy a wife, which we intend to bestowe upon you. the countreturned his highnesse most humble thankes, desiring to know ofwhence, and what she was? it is this gentlewoman, answered the king,who (by the helpe of heaven) hath beene the meanes to save my life.well did the count know her, as having very often before seene her;and although she was very faire and amiable, yet in regard of hermeane birth, which he held as a disparagement to his nobility inblood; he made a scorne of her, and spake thus to the king. would yourhighnesse give me a quacksalver to my wife, one that deales in druggesand physicarie? i hope i am able to bestowe my selfe much betterthen so. why? quoth the king, wouldst thou have us breake our faith;which for the recovery of our health, we have given to this vertuousvirgin, and she will have no other reward, but onely count bertrand tobe her husband? sir, replied the count, you may dispossesse me ofall that is mine, because i am your ward and subject, any where elseyou may bestow me: but pardon me to tell you, that this marriagecannot be made with any liking or allowance of mine, neither will iever give consent thereto.
sir, saide the king, it is our will that it shall be so, vertuousshe is, faire and wise; she loveth thee most affectionately, andwith her mayest thou lead a more noble life, then with the greatestlady in our kingdome. silent, and discontented stoode the count, butthe king commanded preparation for the marriage; and when theappointed time was come, the count (albeit against his will)received his wife at the kings hand; she loving him deerly as her ownelife. when all was done, the count requested of the king, that whatelse remained for further solemnization of the marriage, it might beperformed in his owne country, reserving to himselfe what else heintended. being mounted on horseback, and humbly taking their leave ofthe king, the count would not ride home to his owne dwelling, but intotuscany, where he heard of a warre between the florentines and thesenesi, purposing to take part with the florentines, to whom he waswillingly and honourably welcommed, being created captaine of a worthycompany, and continuing there a long while in service.
the poore forsaken new married countesse, could scarsely bepleased with such dishonourable unkindnesse, yet governing herimpatience with no meane discretion, and hoping by her vertuouscarriage, to compasse the meanes of his recall: home she rode toroussillion, where all the people received her very lovingly. now,by reason of the counts so long absence, all things were there farreout of order; mutinies, quarrels, and civill dissentions, havingprocured many dissolute irruptions, to the expence of much blood inmany places. but she, like a jolly stirring lady, very wise andprovident in such disturbances, reduced all occasions to such civilityagaine, that the people admired her rare behaviour, and condemnedthe count for his unkindnesse towards her.
after that the whole country of roussillion (by the policy andwisedome of this worthy lady) was fully reestablished in their ancientliberties; she made choise of two discreet knights, whom she sent tothe count her husband, to let him understand, that if in displeasureto her, hee was thus become a stranger to his owne country: upon thereturne of his answer, to give him contentment, she would departthence, and by no meanes disturbe him. roughly and churlishly hereplied; let her do as she list, for i have no determination todwell with her, or neere where she is. tell her from me, when sheshall have this ring, which you behold heere on my finger, and a sonnein her armes begotten by me; then will i come live with her, and beher love. the ring he made most precious and deere account of, andnever tooke it off from his finger, in regard of an especiall vertueand property, which he well knew to be remaining in it. and thesetwo knights, hearing the impossibility of these two strict conditions,with no other favour else to be derived from him; sorrowfully returnedbacke to their lady, and acquainted her with this unkinde answer, asalso his unalterable determination, which well you may conceive,must needs be very unwelcome to her.
after she had an indifferent while considered with her selfe, herresolution became so indauntable; that she would adventure to practisesuch meanes, whereby to compasse those two apparant impossibilities,and so to enjoy the love of her husband. having absolutely concludedwhat was to be done, she assembled all the cheefest men of thecountry, revealing unto them (in mournfull manner) what an attempt shehad made already, in hope of recovering her husbands favour, andwhat a rude answer was thereon returned. in the end, she told them,that it did not sute with her unworthinesse, to make the count live asan exile from his owne inheritance, upon no other inducement, butonely in regard of her: wherefore, she had determined betweeneheaven and her soule, to spend the remainder of her dayes inpilgrimages and prayers, for preservation of the counts soule andher owne; earnestly desiring them, to undertake the charge andgovernment of the country, and signifying unto the count, how shehad forsaken his house, and purposed to wander so farre thence, thatnever would she visit roussillion any more. in the deliverie ofthese words, the lords and gentlemen wept and sighedextraordinarily, using many earnest imprecations to alter this resolvein her, but all was in vaine.
having taken her sad and sorrowfull farewell of them all,accompanied onely with her maide, and one of her kinsmen, away shewent, attired in a pilgrimes habit, yet well furnished with moneyand precious jewels, to avoyde all wants which might: befall her intravaile; not acquainting any one whether she went. in no place stayedshe, untill she was arrived at florence, where happening into apoore widdowes house, like a poore pilgrime, she seemed well contentedtherewith. and desiring to heare some tydings of the count, the nextday shee saw him passe by the house on horse-backe, with hiscompany. now, albeit shee knew him well enough, yet shee demanded ofthe good old widdow, what gentleman he was? she made answer, that hewas a stranger there, yet a nobleman, called count bertrand ofroussillion, a very courteous knight, beloved and much respected inthe city. moreover, that he was farre in love with a neighbour ofhers, a young gentlewoman, but very poore and meane in substance,yet of honest life, vertuous, and never taxed with any evill report:onely her poverty was the maine imbarment of her marriage, dwelling inhouse with her mother, who was a wise, honest, and worthy lady.
the countesse having well observed her words, and considered thereonfrom point to point; debating soberly with her owne thoughts, insuch a doubtfull case what was best to be done. when she hadunderstood which was the house, the ancient ladies name, andlikewise her daughters, to whom her husband was now soaffectionately devoted; she made choise of a fit and convenienttime, when (in her pilgrimes habit) secretly she went to the house.there she found the mother and daughter in poore condition, and withas poore a family: whom after she had ceremoniously saluted, shetold the old lady, that she requested but a little conference withher. the lady arose, and giving her kinde entertainement, they wenttogether into a withdrawing chamber, where being both set downe, thecountesse began in this manner.
madame, in my poore opinion, you are not free from the frownes offortune, no more then i my selfe am: but if you were so wellpleased, there is no one that can comfort both our calamities insuch manner, as you are able to do. and beleeve me answered thelady, there is nothing in the world that can be so welcome to me, ashonest comfort. the countesse proceeding on in her former speechessaid: i have now need (good madame) both of your trust and fidelity,whereon if i should rely, and you faile me, it will be your owneundoing as well as mine. speake then boldly, replied the old lady, andremaine constantly assured, that you shall no way be deceived by me.hereupon, the countesse declared the whole course of her love, fromthe very originall to the instant, revealing also what she was, andthe occasion of her comming thither, relating every thing soperfectly, that the lady verily beleeved her, by some reports whichshe had formerly heard, and which mooved her the more to compassion.now, when all circumstances were at full discovered, thus spake thecountesse.
among my other miseries and misfortunes, which hath halfe brokenmy heart in the meere repetition, beside the sad and afflictingsufferance; two things there are, which if i cannot compasse tohave, all hope is quite frustrate for ever, of gaining the grace of mylord and husband. yet these two things may i obtaine by your helpe, ifall be true which i have heard, and you can therein best resolvemee. since my comming to this city, it hath credibly bene told me,that the count my husband, is deeply in love with your daughter. ifthe count (quoth the ladie) love my daughter, and have a wife of hisowne, he must thinke, and so shall surely finde it, that hisgreatnesse is no priviledge for him, whereby to worke dishonour uponher poverty. but indeede, some apparances there are, and such a matteras you speake of, may be so presumed; yet so farre from a very thoughtof entertaining in her or me; as whatsoever i am able to doe, to yeeldyou any comfort and content, you shall find me therein both willingand ready: for i prize my daughters spotlesse poverty at as high arate, as he can doe the pride of his honour.
madame, quoth the countesse, most heartily i thanke you. butbefore i presume any further on your kindnesse, let me first tell you,what faithfully i intend to do for you, if i can bring my purpose toeffect. i see that your daughter is beautifull, and of sufficientyeeres for marriage; and is debarred thereof (as i have heard) onelyby lack of a competent dowry. wherefore madame, in recompence of thefavour i expect from you, i will enrich her with so much ready moneyas you shall thinke sufficient to match her in the degree of honour.poverty made the poore lady, very well to like of such a bountifulloffer, and having a noble heart shee said: great countesse say,wherein am i able to do you any service, as can deserve such agracious offer? if the action be honest; without blame or scandallto my poore, yet undetected reputation, gladly i will do it; and itbeing accomplished, let the requitall rest in your owne noble nature.
observe me then madame, replied the countesse. it is most convenientfor my purpose, that by some trusty and faithfull messenger, youshould advertise the count my husband, that your daughter is, andshall be at his command: but that she may remaine absolutelyassured, that his love is constant to her, and above all other: sheemust entreat him, to send her (as a testimony thereof) the ringwhich he weareth upon his little finger, albeit shee hath heard,that he loveth it deerly. if he send the ring, you shall give it me,and afterward send him word, that your daughter is ready to accomplishhis pleasure; but, for the more safety and secrecie, he must repairehither to your house, where i being in bed insteed of your daughter,faire fortune may so favour mee, that (unknowne to him) i may conceivewith childe. upon which good successe, when time shall serve, havingthe ring on my finger, and a childe in my armes begotten by him, hislove and liking may be recovered, and (by your meanes) i continue withmy husband, as every vertuous wife ought to doe.
the good old lady imagined, that this was a matter somewhatdifficult, and might lay a blamefull imputation on her daughter.neverthelesse, considering, what an honest office it was in her, tobee the meanes, whereby so worthy a countesse should recover anunkinde husband, led altogether by lust, and not a jot of cordialllove; she knew the intent to be honest, the countesse vertuous, andher promise religious, and therefore undertooke to effect it. withinfew dayes after, verie ingeniously, and according to the instructedorder, the ring was obtayned, albeit much against the counts will; andthe countesse, in sted of the ladies vertuous daughter, was embracedby him in bed: the houre proving so auspicious, and juno being lady ofthe ascendent, conjoyned with the witty mercury, shee conceived of twogoodly sonnes, and her deliverance agreed correspondently with thejust time.thus the old lady, not at this time onely, but at many other meetingsbesides; gave the countesse free possession of her husbands pleasures,yet alwayes in such darke and concealed secrecie, as it was neversuspected, nor knowne by any but themselves, the count lying withhis owne wife, and disappointed of her whom he more deerely loved.alwayes at his uprising in the mornings (which usually was beforethe break of day, for preventing the least scruple of suspicion)many familiar conferences passed betweene them, with the gifts ofdivers faire: and costly jewels; all which the countesse carefullykept, and perceiving assuredly, that shee was conceived with childe,shee would no longer bee troublesome to the good old lady; but callingher aside, spake thus to her. madame, i must needes give thankes toheaven and you, because my desires are amply accomplished, and bothtime and your deserts doe justly challenge, that i shouldaccordingly quite you before my departure. it remaineth now in yourowne power, to make what demand you please of me, which yet i will notgive you by way of reward, because that would seeme to bee base andmercenary: but onely whatsoever you shall receive of me, is inhonourable recompence of faire and vertuous deservings, such as anyhonest and well-minded lady in the like distresse, may with goodcredit allow, and yet no prejudice to her reputation.
although poverty might well have tutored the ladies tongue,to-demand a liberall recompence for her paines; yet shee requested butan 100 pounds, as a friendly helpe towards her daughters marriage, andthat with a bashfull blushing was uttered too; yet the countessegave her five hundred pounds, besides so many rich and costlyjewels, as amounted to a farre greater summe. so shee returned toher wonted lodging, at the aged widdowes house, where first shee wasentertained at her comming to florence; and the good old lady, toavoyde the counts repairing to her house any more, departed thencesodainly with her daughter, to divers friends of hers that dwelt inthe country, whereat the count was much discontented; albeitafterward, he did never heare any more tidings of hir or her daughter,who was worthily married, to her mothers great comfort.
not long after, count bertrand was recalled home by his people:and he having heard of his wives absence, went to roussillion somuch the more willingly. and the countesse knowing her husbandsdeparture from florence, as also his safe arrivall at his ownedwelling, remained still in florence, untill the time of herdeliverance, which was of two goodly sonnes, lively resembling thelookes of their father, and all the perfect lineaments of his body.perswade your selves, she was not a little carefull of theirnursing; and when she saw the time answerable to her determination,she tooke her journey (unknowne to any) and arrived with them atmontpellier, where she rested her selfe for divers dayes, after solong and wearisome a journey.
upon the day of all saints, the count kept a solemne feastivall, forthe assembly of his lords, knights, ladies, and gentlewomen: uponwhich joviall day of generall rejoycing, the countesse attired inher wonted pilgrimes weed, repaired thither, entring into the greathall where the tables were readily covered for dinner. preassingthrough the throng of people, with her two children in her armes, spresumed unto the place where the count sate, and falling on her kneesbefore him, the teares trickling abundantly downe her cheekes, thusshe spake. worthy lord, i am thy poore, despised, and unfortunatewife; who, that thou mightst returne home, and not be an exile fromthine owne abiding, have thus long gone begging through the world. yetnow at length, i hope thou wilt be so honourably-minded, as toperforme thine owne too strict imposed conditions, made to the twoknights which i sent unto thee, and which (by thy command) i wasenjoyned to do. behold here in mine armes, not onely one sonne by theebegotten, but two twins, and thy ring beside. high time is it now,if men of honour respect their promises, and after so long and tedioustravell, i should at last be welcommed as thy true wife.
the count hearing this, stoode as confounded with admiration; forfull well he knew the ring: and both the children were so perfectlylike him, as he was confirmed to be their father by generalljudgement. upon his urging by what possible meanes this could bebrought to passe: the countesse in presence of the whole assembly, andunto her eternall commendation, related the whole history, even insuch manner as you have formerly heard it. moreover, she reportedthe private speeches in bed, uttered betweene himselfe and her,being witnessed more apparantly, by the costly jewels there openlyshewne. all which infallible proofes, proclaiming his shame, and hermost noble carriage to her husband; he confessed, that she had toldnothing but the truth in every point which she had reported.
commending her admirable constancy, exceliency of wit, and sprightlycourage, in making such a bold adventure; he kissed the two sweeteboyes, and to keepe his promise, whereto he was earnestlyimportuned, by all his best esteemed friends there present, especiallythe honourable ladies, who would have no deniall, but by forgettinghis former harsh and uncivill carriage towards her, to accept herfor ever as his lawfull wife, folding her in his armes, and sweetlykissing her divers times together, he bad her welcome to him, as hisvertuous, loyall, and most loving wife, and so (for ever after) hewould acknowledge her. well knew hee that she had store of betterbeseeming garments in the house, and therefore requested the ladies towalke with her to her chamber, to uncase her of those pilgrimes weeds,and cloath her in her owne more sumptuous garments, even those whichshee wore on her wedding day, because that was not the day of hiscontentment, but onely this; for now he confessed her to be his wifeindeede, and now he would give the king thanks for her, and now wascount bertrand truly married to the faire juliet of narbona.
the third day, the tenth novell
alibech turns hermit, and a monk, rustico, teaches her to put thedevil in hell. afterwards she is brought home, and married toneerbale.
dioneus listened attentively to the queen's discourse, and whenshe had done and he knew that only he remained to complete the day'sentertainment, without trifling away the time or awaiting a commandfrom the queen, thus he began.
gracious ladies, it may be you have not heard how the devil is putin hell. therefore, and since it will not be far off the subject ofthis day's discourse, i will tell it you. perhaps, hearing it, you maythe better understand that albeit love more affects gay palaces andluxurious bowers than the cabins of the poor, yet he by no meansdisdains to manifest his power even in the depths of the forest, onstark mountains and in the caves of the desert; and thus we mustacknowledge that all things wheresoever they be are subject to him.
coming, then, to my story, i must tell you that in capsa, a cityof barbary, there dwelt aforetime a very rich man, who had amongseveral children a little daughter, fair and of a docile temper, whosename was alibech.
this girl, a heathen in a place where many were christian, usedoften to hear her neighbours extol the christian faith and devotion tothe service of god; wherefore she asked one of them how god could bestbe served and with the least hindrance. she was told that they bestserved him who removed themselves farthest from the things of theworld, as in particular the hermits who had withdrawn from the city tothe wilds of thebais.
the simple maiden, aged perhaps some fourteen years, moved rather bya childish whim than any real vocation, set out on the morrow aloneand telling nobody to walk into the desert. so firmly was she resolvedthat after several days of hardship she reached the wilderness ofthebais. from afar she descried a little hut, and coming up to it,found there a holy man. amazed to see such a one there, he askedwhat she came to seek. her answer was that, aspiring towards god,she came thither to serve him, and in the hope of finding a teacher tothat end.
the pious hermit, seeing her so young and fair, was afraid lestthe devil might ensnare him; so he praised her intent, and givingher roots, wild apples and dates to eat and a draught of water,said: "daughter, not far from here there dwells a holy man such asthou seekest: a fitter man than i. go thou to him." and he put heron the way.
the second hermit advised her as the first; and faring farther shecame to the cell of a young hermit, a very pious and righteous man,whose name was rustico. to him she repeated her mission. willing toput his resolution to so great a test, he forebore to send her away,and took her into his cell. at nightfall he made her a bed ofpalm-leaves, and bade her lie down to rest.
temptations did not long delay an assault on his constancy; andfinding it much beyond his strength to withstand them, he soon gave upthe battle, and confessed himself worsted. so putting away all saintlythoughts, prayers and mortifications, he let his mind dwell on thefreshness and beauty of his companion. from this he passed to thinkingof the best means of bringing her to his desires without giving hercause to suspect him of lewdness.therefore, satisfying himself by a few questions that she had neverhad carnal knowledge of a man, and was indeed as innocent as sheseemed, he thought of a plan to enjoy her under colour of serving god.he began expounding to her the devil's enmity to the almighty, andwent on to impress upon her that the most acceptable service she couldrender to god would be to put the devil in hell, whereto the lordhad condemned him.
the little maid asked him how this might be done. "thou shalt soonlearn," replied rustico, "only do as thou seest me do." thereupon hetook off what few clothes he wore, and stood stark naked; and assoon as the girl had done likewise he fell on his knees as though topray, and made her kneel face to face with him.
this done, rustico's desire was more than ever inflamed at the sightof her beauty, and the resurrection of the flesh came to pass.seeing this, and not knowing what it meant, alibech asked: "rustico,what is it thou hast that thrusts itself out in front, and that i havenot?" "my daughter," quoth rustico, "it is that same devil of whom ihave been telling thee. dost thou mark him? behold, he gives me suchsore trouble that i can hardly bear it."
"the lord be praised!" said she; "for now i see that i am moreblessed than thou in that i have not this devil."
rustico retorted: "thou sayest truly; but thou hast another thingthat i have not, and hast it in place of this."
"what is that?" says alibech.
to this rustico replied: "thou hast hell; and will tell thee mybelief that god gave it thee for the health of my soul. for, if thouwilt take pity on me for the troubling of this devil, and suffer me toput him in hell, thou wilt comfort me extremely, and at the sametime please and serve god in the highest measure; to which end, asthou sayest, thou art come hither."
all unsuspecting, the girl answered. him: "my father, since i havethis hell, let the thing be done when thou desirest it."
then rustico said: "bless thee, my dear daughter; let us go atonce and put him in his place, that i may be at peace."
so saying, he laid her on one of their rough beds, and set aboutshowing her how to shut the accursed one in his prison. the girl,who until then had no experience of putting devils in hell, feltsome pain at this first trial of it; which made her say to rustico:"father, this devil must indeed be wicked, and in very sooth anenemy of god, for he hurts hell itself, let alone other things, whenhe is put back in it."
"my daughter," said rustico, "it will not always be so." and to makesure of it, before either of them moved from the bed they put him insix times, after which the devil hung his head and was glad to letthem be.
but in the succeeding days he rose up many times; and the girl,always disposing herself to subdue him, began to take pleasure inthe exercise, and to say such things as: "i see now the truth ofwhat the good folk in capsa told me, that serving god is a delight;for i never remember doing anything that gave me as much joy andpleasure as this putting the devil in hell. so i think the peoplewho spend their time otherwise than in serving god must be veryfoolish."
often she would come to rustico and say: "father, i came hither toserve god, not to stand idle. let us go put the devil in hell." andonce, when it had been done, she asked: "rustico, why does he wantto get out of hell? if only he would stay there as willingly as helltakes him in and holds him, he would never want to come out at all."by thus constantly egging him on and exhorting him to god's servicethe girl so preyed upon rustico that he shivered with cold whenanother man would have sweated. he had perforce to tell her that itwas not just to punish the devil by putting him in hell save when hehad lifted his head in pride; and that by god's mercy they had sochastened him that he only implored heaven to be left in peace. thusfor a time he silenced her.
but she, finding that rustico did not call on her to put the devilin hell, said one day: "even though your devil is punished and nolonger troubles you, my hell gives me no peace. you will do acharity if with your devil you will quiet the raging of my hell, aswith my hell i tamed the pride of your devil to these demandsrustico on a diet of herbs and water could ill respond; and he toldher that to appease hell would need too many devils, none the lesshe would do all that in him lay. at times he could satisfy her, but soseldom that it was like feeding an elephant with peas. therefore thegirl thought she was not serving god as well as she would like, andshe grumbled most of the time.
whilst things stood thus amiss between rustico's devil and alibech'shell, for overmuch eagerness of the one part and too littleperformance of the other, a fire broke out in capsa and burned thefather of alibech with his children and every one of his kin, sothat alibech became the sole heiress to his goods. whereupon a certainneerbale, a young man who had wasted his patrimony in high living,sought for alibech in the belief that she was alive, and succeededin finding her before the court had declared her father's goodsforfeit as being without an owner. much to the relief of rustico andagainst the girl's will, neerbale brought her back to capsa andmarried her, so becoming entitled in her right to a large fortune.
one day, when as yet neerbale had not lain with her, some of herwomen asked how she had served god in the desert. she replied that shehad served him by putting the devil in hell, and that neerbale hadcommitted a grievous sin in taking her from such pious work. then theyasked: "how is the devil put in hell?" to which the girl answered withwords and gestures showing how it had been done. the women laughedso heartily that they have not done laughing yet, and said to her:"grieve not, my child; that is done as well here. neerbale willserve god right well with thee in this way."
as one repeated the words to another throughout the town, itbecame a familiar saying that the most acceptable of all services togod is to put the devil in hell. the saying has crossed the sea andbecome current among us, as it still is.
wherefore, young ladies, i beseech you if you would deserve heaven'sgrace, lend yourselves to the putting of the devil in hell; for itis a thing beloved of god, pleasing to the participants, and onefrom which much good comes and ensues.
a thousand times and more were the chaste ladies moved to laughterby dioneus's novel, so much were his phrases to their liking. andthe queen perceiving that as his tale was ended, her office hadexpired, took the crown of laurel from her head and graciouslyplaced it on the head of philostratus, saying: "now we shall seewhether the wolf will rule the sheep better than the sheep ruled thewolves." at this philostratus laughed, and retorted: "if i had my way,the wolves would have taught the sheep to put the devil in hell, noless well than rustico taught alibech. since we did not, call us notwolves, for ye were no sheep. howbeit, i will reign as best i may,seeing ye have laid the trust on me."
neiphila cried out: "mark this, philostratus; in trying to teachus you might have had such a lesson as masetto di lamporechio had ofthe nuns, and recovered your speech just as your bare bones hadlearned to whistle without a master." finding himself thus evenlymatched, philostratus ceased his pleasantries; and beginning toconsider on the charge committed to his care, called the master of thehoushold, to know in what estate all matters were, because where anydefect appeared, every thing might be the sooner remedied, for thebetter satisfaction of the company, during the time of hisauthority. then returning backe to the assembly, thus he began. lovelyladies, i would have you to know, that since the time of ability inme, to distinguish betweene good and evill, i have alwayes benesubject (perhaps by the meanes of some beauty heere among us) to theproud and imperious dominion of love, with expression of all duty,humility, and most intimate desire to please yet all hath prooved tono purpose, but still i have bin rejected for some other, whereby mycondition hath falne from ill to worse, and so still it is likely,even to the houre: of my death. in which respect, it best pleaseth me,that our conferences to morrow, shall extend to no other argument, bitonly such cases as are most conformable to my calamity, namely ofsuch, whose love hath had unhappy ending, because i await no otherissue of mine; nor willingly would i be called by any other name,but only, the miserable and unfortunate lover.
having thus spoken, he arose againe; granting leave to the rest,to recreate themselves till supper time. the garden was very faire andspacious, affoording, large limits for their severall walkes; thesun being already so low descended, that it could not be offensiveto any one, the connies, kids, and young hindes skipping every whereabout them, to their no meane, pleasure and contentment, dioneus andfiammetta, sate singing together, of messire guiglielmo, and thelady of vertur. philomena and pamphilus playing at the chesse, allsporting themselves as best they pleased. but the houre of supperbeing come, and the tables covered about the faire fountaine, theysate downe and supt in most loving manner. then philostratus, not toswerve from the course which had beene observed by the queenesbefore him, so soone as the tables were taken away, gave commaund thatmadam lauretta should beginne the dance, and likewise to sing asong. my gracious lord (quoth she) i can skill of no other songs,but onely a peece of mine owne, which i have already learned by heart,and may well beseeme this assembly: if you please to allow of that,i am ready to performe it with all obedience. lady, replyed theking, you your selfe being so faire and lovely, so needs must bewhatsoever commeth from you, therefore let us heare such as youhave. madam lauretta, giving enstruction to the chorus prepared, andbegan in this manner.
the song
no soule so comfortlesse,
hath more cause to expresse,
like woe and heavinesse,
as i poore amorous maide.
he that did forme the heavens and every starre,
made me as best him pleased,
lovely and gracious, no element at jarre,
or else in gentle breasts to moove sterne warre,
but to have strifes appeased
where beauties eye should make the deepest scarre.
and yet when all things are confest,
never was any soule distrest,
like my poore amorous maide.
no soule so comfortlesse, etc.
there was a time, when once i was held deare,
blest were those happy dayes:
numberlesse love suites whispred in mine eare,
all of faire hope, but none of desperate feare;
and all sung beauties praise.
why should blacke cloudes obscure so bright a cleare?
and why should others swimme in joy,
and no heart drowned in annoy,
like mine poore amorous maide?
no soule so comfortlesse, etc.
well may i curse that sad and dismall day,
when in unkinde exchange;
another beauty did my hopes betray,
and stole my dearest love from me away:
which i thought very strange,
considering vowes were past, and what else may
assure a loyall maidens trust.
never was lover so unjust,
like mine poore amorous maide.
no soule so comfortlesse, etc.
come then kinde death, and finish all my woes,
thy helpe is now the best.
come lovely nymphes, lend hands mine eyes to close,
and let him wander wheresoere he goes,
vaunting of mine unrest;
beguiling others by his treacherous showes.
grave on my monument,
no true love was worse spent,
then mine poore amorous maide.
no soule so comfortlesse, etc.
so did madam lauretta finish her song, which being well observedof them all, was understood by some in divers kinds: some alludingit one way, and others according to their owne apprehensions, butall consenting that both it was an excellent ditty, well devised,and most sweetly sung. afterward, lighted torches being brought,because the stars had already richly spangled all the heavens, and thefit houre of rest approaching: the king commanded them all to theirchambers, where we meane to leave them untill the next morning.
the fourth day
wherein all the severall descourses, are under the government of
honourable philstratus: and concerning such
persons, whose loves have had successelesse ending
most worthy ladies, i have alwayes heard, as well by the sayingsof the judecious, as also by mine owne observation and reading, thatthe impetuous and violent windes of envy, do sildome blow turbulently,but on the highest towers and tops of the trees most eminentlyadvanced. yet (in mine opinion) i have found my selfe much deceived;because, by striving with my very uttermost endeavour, to shunne theoutrage of those implacable winds; i have laboured to go, not onely byplaine and even pathes but likewise through the deepest vallies. asvery easily may be seene and observed in the reading of these fewsmall novels, which i have written not only in our vulgar florentineprose, without any ambitious title: but also in a most humble stile,so low and gentle as possibly i could. and although i have bene rudelyshaken, yea, almost halfe unrooted, by the extreame agitation of thoseblustering winds, and torne in peeces by that base back-biter, envy:yet have i not (for all that) discontinued, or broken any part of mineintended enterprize. wherefore, i can sufficiently witnesse (by mineowne comprehension) the saying so much observed by the wise, to bemost true: that nothing is without envy in this world, but miseryonely.
but what shall i say to them, who take so great compassion on mypovertie, as they advise me to get some thing, whereon to make myliving? assuredly, i know not what to say in this case, except bydue consideration made with my selfe, how they would answer me, ifnecessitie should drive me to crave kindnesse of them;questionlesse, they would then say: goe, seeke comfort among thyfables and follies.
but now it is time (bright beauties) to returne whence we parted,and to follow our former order begun, because it may seeme we havewandered too farre. by this time the sun had chased the starre-lightfrom the heavens, and the shadie moisture from the ground, whenphilostratus the king being risen, all the company arose likewise.when being come into the goodly garden, they spent the time invarietie of sports, dining where they had supt the night before. andafter that the sunne was at his highest, and they had refreshedtheir spirits with a little slumbering, they sate downe (accordingto custome) about the faire fountaine. and then the king commandedmadam fiammettal that she should give beginning to the dayes novels:when she, without any longer delaying, began:
the fourth day, the first novell
wherein is declared the power of love, and their cruilty justly
reprehended, who image to make the vigour thereof
cease, by abusing or killing one of the lovers
tancrede, prince of salerne, caused the amorous friend of hisdaughter to bee slaine, and sent her his heart in a cup of gold: whichafterwards she steeped in an impoysoned water, and then drinking it,so dyed.
our king (most noble and vertuous ladies) hath this day given us asubject, very rough and stearne to discourse on, and so much therather, if we consider, that we are come hither to be merry andpleasant, where sad tragicall reports are no way suteable, especially,by reviving the teares of others, to bedew our owne cheekes withall.nor can any such argument be spoken of, without moving compassion bothin the reporters, and hearers. but (perhaps) it was his highnessepleasure, to moderate the delights which we have already had. orwhatsoever else hath provoked him thereto, seeing it is not lawfullfor me, to alter or contradict his appointment; i will recount anaccident very pittifull, or rather most unfortinate, and well worthyto be graced with bur teares.
tancrede, prince of salerne (which city, before the consulles ofrome held dominion in that part of italy, stoode free, and thence(perchance) tooke the moderne title of a principality was a veryhumane lord, and of ingenious nature; if, in his elder yeeres, hehad not soiled his hands in the blood of lovers, especially one ofthem, being both neere and deere unto him. so it fortuned, that duringthe whole life time of this prince, he had but one onely daughter(albeit it had beene much better, if he had had at all) whom he sochoisely loved and esteemed, as never was any childe more deerelyaffected of a father: and so farre extended his over-curious respectof her, as he would seldome admit her to be forth of his sight;neither would he suffer her to marry, although she had outstept (bydivers yeeres) the age meete for marriage.
neverthelesse, at length, he matched her with the sonne to theduke of capua, who lived no long while with her; but left her in awiddowed estate, and then she returned home to her father againe.
this lady, had all the most absolute perfections, both of favour andfeature, as could be wished in any woman, young, queintly disposed,and of admirable understanding, more (perhappes) then was requisite inso weake a body. continuing thus in court with the king her father,who loved her beyond all his future hopes; like a lady of great andglorious magnificence, she lived in all delights and pleasure. shewell perceiving, that her father thus exceeding in his affection toher, had no minde at all of re-marrying her, and holding it mostimmodest in her, to solicite him with any such suite: concluded in hermindes private consultations, to make choise of some one especiallfriend or favourite (if fortune would prove so furtherous to her) whomshe might acquaint secretly, with her sober, honest, and familiarpurposes. her fathers court being much frequented, with plentifullaccesse of brave gentlemen, and others of inferiour quality, ascommonly the courts ofkings and princes are, whose carriage and demeanor she veryheedfully observed. there was a young gentleman among all the rest,a servant to her father, and named cuiscardo, a man not derived fromany great descent by blood, yet much more noble by vertue andcommandable behaviour, then appeared in any of the other, none pleasedher opinion, like as he did; so that by often noting his parts andperfections, her affections being but a glowing sparke at first,grew like a bavin to take rame, yet kept so closely as possibly shecould; as ladies are warie enough in their love.
the young gentleman, though poore, being neither blocke nor dullard,perceived what he made no outward shew of, and understood himselfeso sufficiently, that holding it no meane happinesse to be affected byher, he thought it very base and cowardly in him, if he should notexpresse the like to her againe. so loving mutually (yet secretly)in this maner, and she coveting nothing more, then to have privateconference with him, yet not daring to trust any one with so importanta matter; at length she devised a new cunning stratageme, tocompasse her longing desire, and acquaint him with her privatepurpose, which proved to be in this manner. she wrote a letter,concerning what was the next day to be done, for their secretmeeting together; and conveying it within the joynt of an hollow cane,in jesting manner threw it to guiscardo, saying; let your man make useof this, insteed of a paire of bellowes, when he meaneth to makefire in your chamber. guiscardo taking up the cane, and consideringwith himselfe, that neither was it given, or the wordes thus spoken,but doubtlesse on some important occasion: went unto his lodgingwith the cane, where viewing it respectively, he found it to be cleft,and opening it with his knife, found there the written letterenclosed.
after he had reade it, and well considered on the service thereinconcerned; he was the most joyfull man of the world, and began tocontrive his aptest meanes, for meeting with his gracious mistresse,and according as she had given him direction. in a corner of the kingspalace, it being seated on a rising hill, a cave had long beene madein the body of the same hill, which received no light into it, butby a small spiracle or vent-loope, made out ingeniously on the hilsside. and because it had not beene a long time frequented, by theaccesse of any body, that vent-light was over-growne with briars andbushes, which almost engirt it round about. no one could descendinto this cave or vault, but only by a secret paire of staires,answering to a lower chamber of the palace, and very neere to theprincesse lodging, as being altogether at her command, by meanes ofa strong barred and defensible doore, whereby to mount or descend ather pleasure. and both the cave it selfe, as also the degreesconducting downe into it, were now so quite worne out of memory (inregard it had not beene visited by any one in long time before) asno man remembred that there was any such thing.
but love, from whose bright discerning eies, nothing can be soclosely concealed, but at the length it commeth to light, had madethis amorous lady mindefull thereof, and because she would not bediscovered in her intention, many dayes together, her soule becameperplexed; by what meanes that strong doore might best be opened,before she could compasse to performe it. but after that she had foundout the way, and gone downe her selfe alone into the cave; observingthe loope-light and had made it commodious for her purpose, she gaveknowledge thereof to guiscardo, to have him devise an apt course forhis descent, acquainting him truly with the height, and how farre itwas distant from the ground within. after he had found thesouspirall in the hils side, and given it a larger entrance for hissafer passage; he provided a ladder of cords, with steppessufficient for his descending and ascending, as also a wearing sutemade of leather, to keepe his skinne unscrached of the thornes, and toavoyde all suspition of his resorting thither. in this manner wenthe to the saide loope-hole the night following, and having fastenedthe one end of his corded ladder, to the strong stumpe of a tree beingby it; by meanes of the saide ladder, descended downe into the cave,and there attended the comming of his lady.
she, on the morrow morning, pretending to her waiting woman, thatshe was scarsly well, and therefore would not be diseased the mostpart of that day; commanded them to leave her alone in her chamber,and not to returne untill she called for them, locking the doore herselfe for better security. then opened she the doore of the cave,and going downe the staires, found there her amorous friend guiscardo,whom she saluting with a chaste and modest kisse; causing him toascend up the stayres with her into her chamber. this long desired,and now obtained meeting, caused the two deerely affected lovers, inkinde discourse of amorous argument (without incivill or rudedemeanor) to spend there the most part of that day, to their heartsjoy and mutuall contentment. and having concluded on their oftenmeeting there, in this cunning and concealed sort; guiscardo wentdowne into the cave againe, the princesse making the doore fastafter him, and then went forth among her women. so in the nightseason, guiscardo ascended up againe by his ladder of cords, andcovering the loopehole with brambles and bushes, returned (unseeneof any) to his owne lodging: the cave being afterward guilty oftheir often meeting there in this manner.
but fortune, who hath alwayes bin a fatall enemy to lovers stolnefelicities, became envious of their thus secret meeting, and overthrew(in an instant) all their poore happinesse, by an accident mostspightfull and malicious. the king had used divers dayes before, afterdinner time, to resort all alone to his daughters chamber, thereconversing with her in most loving manner. one unhappy day amongst therest, when the princesse, being named ghismonda, was sporting in herprivate garden among her ladies, the king (at his wonted time) went tohis daughters chamber, being neither heard or seene by any. norwould he have his daughter called from her pleasure, but finding thewindowes fast shut, and the curtaines close drawne about the bed; hesate downe in a chaire behind it, and leaning his head upon the bed,his body being covered with the curtaine, as if he hid himselfepurposely; he mused on so many matters, at last he fell fast asleepe.
it hath bin observed as an ancient adage, that when disasters areordained to any one, commonly they prove to be inevitable, as pooreghismonda could witnesse too well. for while the king thus slept,she having (unluckily) appointed another meeting with guiscardo,left hir gentlewomen in the garden, and stealing softly into herchamber, having made all fast and sure, for being descried by anyperson: opened the doore to guiscardo, who stood there ready on thestaire-head, awaiting his entrance; and they sitting downe on thebed side (according as they were wont to do) began their usuallkinde of conference againe, with sighes and loving kisses mingledamong them. it chanced that the king awaked, and both hearing andseeing this familiarity of guiscardo with his daughter, he becameextreamly confounded with greefe thereat. once he intended, to cry outfor have them both there apprehended; but he helde it a part ofgreater wisedome, to sit silent still, and (if he could) to keepehimselfe so closely concealed: to the end, that he might the moresecretly, and with farre lesse disgrace to himselfe, performe whathe had rashly intended to do.
the poore discovered lovers, having ended their amorousinterparlance, without suspition of the kings being so neere inperson, or any else, to betray their overconfident trust; guiscardodescended againe into the cave, and she leaving the chamber,returned to her women in the garden; all which tancrede too wellobserved, and in a rapture of fury, departed (unseene) into his ownelodging. the same night, about the houre of mens first sleepe, andaccording as he had given order; guiscardo was apprehended, even as hewas comming forth of the loope-hole, and in his homely leather habite.very closely was he brought before the king, whose heart was swolne sogreat with griefe, as hardly was he able to speake: notwithstanding,at the last he began thus. guiscardo . cardo, the love and respect ihave used towards thee, hath not deserved the shamefull wrong whichthou hast requited me withall, and as i have seene with mine owne eyesthis day. whereto guiscardo could answer nothing else, but onely this:alas my lord! love is able to do much more, then either you, or i.whereupon, tancrede commanded, that he should be secretly wellguarded, in a neere adjoyning chamber, and on the next day,ghismonda having (as yet) heard nothing hereof, the kings braine beinginfinitely busied and troubled, after dinner, and as he often had usedto do: he went to his daughters chamber, where calling for her, andshutting the doores closely to them, the teares trickling downe hisaged white beard, thus he spake to her.
ghismonda, i was once grounded in a setled perswasion, that i truelyknew thy vertue, and honest integrity of life; and this beleefecould never have beene altred in mee, by any sinister reportswhatsoever, had not mine eyes seene, and mine eares heard thecontrary. nor did i so much as conceive a thought either of thineaffection, or private conversing with any man, but onely he that wasto be thy husband. but now, i my selfe being able to avouch thy folly,imagine what an heart-breake this will be to me, so long as liferemaineth in this poore, weake, and aged body. yet, if needes thoumust have yeelded to this wanton weaknesse, i would thou hadst madechoise of a man, answerable to thy birth and nobility: whereas onthe contrary, among so many worthy spirits as resort to my court, thoulikest best to converse with that silly young man guiscardo, one ofvery meane and base descent, and by me (even for gods sake)
from his very youngest yeares, brought up to this instant in mycourt; wherein thou hast given me much affliction of minde, and sooverthrowne my senses, as i cannot well imagine how i should dealewith thee. for him, whom i have this night caused to be surprized,even as he came forth of your close contrived conveyance, anddetaine as my prisoner, i have resolved how to proceed with him: butconcerning thy selfe, mine oppressions are so many and violent, as iknow not what to say of thee. e. way, thou hast meerly murthered theunfeigned affection i bare thee, as never any father could expressemore to his childe: and then againe, thou hast kindled a most justindignation in me, by thine immodest and wilfull folly, and whereasnature pleadeth pardon for the one, yet justice standeth up againstthe other, and urgeth cruell severity against thee: neverthelesse,before i will determine upon any resolution, i come purposely first toheare thee speake, and what thou canst say for thy selfe, in a badcase, so desperate and dangerous.
having thus spoken, he hung downe the head in his bosome, weeping asaboundantly, as if he had beene a childe severely disciplinde. onthe other side, ghismonda hearing the speeches of her father, andperceiving withall, that not onely her secret love was discovered, butalso guiscardo was in close prison, the matter which most of all didtorment her; she fell into a very strange kinde of extasie, scorningteares, and entreating tearmes, such as feminine frailety arealwayes aptest unto: but rather, with height of courage, controulingfeare or servile basenesse, and declaring invincible fortitude inher very lookes, she concluded with her selfe, rather then to urge anyhumble perswasions, she would lay her life downe at the stake. forplainely she perceived, that guiscardo already was a dead man inlaw, and death was likewise welcome to her, rather then thedeprivation of her love; and therefore, not like a weeping woman, oras checkt by the offence committed, but carelesse of any harmehappening to her: stoutely and couragiously, not a teare appearingin her eye, or her soule any way to be perturbed, thus she spake toher father.
tancrede, to denie what i have done, or to entreate any favourfrom you, is now no part of my disposition: for as the one canlittle availe me, so shall not the other any way advantage me.moreover, i covet not that you should extend any clemency or kindnesseto me, but by my voluntary confession of the truth do intend (first ofall) to defend mine honour, with reasons sound, good, andsubstantiall, and then vertuously pursue to full effect, thegreatnesse of my minde and constant resolution. true it is, that ihave loved, and still do, honourable guiscardo, purposing the likeso long as i shall live, which will be but a small while: but if it bepossible to continue the same affection after death, it is for evervowed to him onely. nor did mine owne womanish weaknesse so muchthereto induce me, as the matchlesse vertues shining clearly inguiscardo, and the little respect you had of marrying me againe. whyroyall father, you cannot be ignorant, that you being composed offlesh and blood, have begotten a daughter of the selfe samecomposition, and not made of stone or iron. moreover, you ought toremember (although now you are farre stept in yeeres) what the lawesof youth are, and with what difficulty they are to be contradicted.considering withall, that albeit (during the vigour of your best time)you evermore were exercised in armes; yet you should likewiseunderstand, that negligence and idle delights, have mighty power,not onely in young people, but also in them of greatest yeares.
i being then made of flesh and blood, and so derived from yourselfe; having had also so little benefit of life, that i am yet in thespring, and blooming time of my blood: by either of these reasons, imust needs be subject to naturall desires, wherein such knowledge as ihave once already had, in the estate of my marriage, perhaps mightmove a further intelligence of the like delights, according to thebetter ability of strength, which exceeding all capacity ofresistance, induced a second motive to affection, answerable to mytime and youthfull desires, and so (like a yong woman) i became cameagaine; yet did i strive, even with all my utmost might, and bestvertuous faculties abiding in me, no way to disgrace either you ormy selfe, as (in equall censure) yet have i not done. but nature isabove all humane power, and love commanded by nature, hath prevailedfor love, joyning with fortune: in meere pitty and commiseration of myextreame wrong, i found them both most benigne and gracious,teaching mee a way secret enough, whereby i might reach the heightof my desires, howsoever you became instructed, or (perhaps) foundit out by accident; so it was, and i deny it not.
nor did i make election of guiscardo by chance, or rashly, as manywomen doe, but by deliberate counsell in my soule, and most matureadvise; i chose him above all other, and having his honestharmelesse conversation, mutually we enjoyed our hearts contentment.now it appeareth, that i have not offended but by love; in imitationof vulgar opinion, rather then truth: you seeke to reprove mebitterly, alleaging no other maine argument for your anger, butonely my not choosing a gentleman, or one more worthy. wherein it ismost evident, that you do not so much checke my fault, as theordination of fortune, who many times advanceth men of meanestesteeme, and abaseth them of greater merit. but leaving thisdiscourse, let us looke into the originall of things, wherein we arefirst to observe, that from one masse or lumpe of flesh, both we,and all other received our flesh, and one creator hath created allthings; yea, all creatures, equally in their forces and faculties, andequall likewise in their vertue: which vertue was the first thatmade distinction of birth and equality, in regard, that such as havethe most liberall portion thereof, and performed actions theretoanswerable, were thereby tearmed noble; all the rest remainingunnoble: now although contrary use did afterward hide and concealethis law, yet was it not therefore banished from nature or goodmanners. in which respect, whosoever did execute all his actions byvertue, declared himselfe openly to be noble; and he that tearmedhim otherwise, it was an errour in the miscaller, and not in theperson so wrongfully called; as the very same priviledge is yet infull force among us at this day.
cast an heedfull eye then (good father) upon all your gentlemen, andadvisedly examine their vertues, conditions, and manner ofbehaviour. on the other side, observe those parts remaining inguiscardo: and then if you will judge truly, and without affection,you will confesse him to be most noble, and that all your gentlemen(in respect of him) are but base groomes and villaines. his vertuesand excelling perfections, i never credited from the report orjudgement of any person; but onely by your speeches, and mine owneeyes as true witnesses. who did ever more commend guiscardo, extollingall those singularities in him, most requisite to be in an honestvertuous man; then you your selfe have done? nor neede you to besorry, or ashamed of your good opinion concerning him: for if mineeyes have not deceived my judgement, you never gave him the least partof praise, but i have knowne much more in him, then ever your wordswere able to expresse: wherefore, if i have beene any way deceived,truly the deceit proceeded onely from you. how wil you then maintaine,that i have throwne my liking on a man of base condition? in troth(sir) you cannot. perhaps you will alledge, that he is but meane andpoore; i confesse it, and surely it is to your shame, that you havenot bestowne place of more preferment, on a man so honest and welldeserving, and having bene so long a time your servant.neverthelesse poverty impayreth not any part of noble nature, butwealth hurries into horrible confusions. many kings and greatprinces have heeretofore beene poore, when divers of them that havedelved into the earth, and kept flockes in the field, have beeneadvanced to riches, and exceeded the other in wealth.
now, as concerning your last doubt, which most of all afflictethyou, namely, how you shall deale with me; boldly rid your braine ofany such disturbance; for if you have resolved now in your extremityof yeres, to doe that which your younger dayes evermore despised, imeane, to become cruell; use your utmost cruelty against me: for i wilnever intreat you to the contrary, because i am the sole occasion ofthis offence, if it doe deserve the name of an offence. and this idare assure you, that if you deale not with me, as you have donealready, or intend to guiscardo, mine owne hands shall act as much:and therfore give over your teares to women; and if you purpose tobe cruel, let him and me in death drinke both of one cup, at leastif you imagine that we have deserved it.
the king knew well enough the high spirit of his daughter, but yet(neverthelesse) he did not beleeve, that her words would proveactions, or she do as she said. and therefore parting from her, andwithout intent of using any cruelty to her, concluded, by quenchingthe heat of another to coole the fiery rage of her distemper,commanding two of his follow (who had the custody of guiscardo) thatwithout any rumour or noise at all, they should strangle him the nightensuing, and taking the heart forth of his body, to bring it to him,which they performed according to their charge. on the next day, theking called for a goodly standing cup of gold, wherein he put theheart of guiscardo, sending it by one of his most familiar servants tohis daughter, with command also to use these words to her. thyfather hath sent thee this present, to comfort thee with that thingwhich most of all thou affectest, even as thou hast comforted him withthat which he most hated.
ghismonda, nothing altered from her cruell deliberation, after herfather was departed from her, caused certaine poisonous roots andhearbes to be brought her, which shee (by distillation) made a waterof, to drinke sodainly, whensoever any crosse accident should comefrom her father; whereupon, when the messenger from her father haddelivered her the present, and uttered the words as he was commaunded:shee tooke the cup, and looking into it with a setled countenance,by sight of the heart, and effect of the message, she knew certainely,that was the heart of guiscardo; then looking stearnely on theservant, thus she spake unto him. my honest friend, it is no more thenright and justice, that so worthy a heart as this is, should haveany worser grave then gold, wherein my father hath dealt mostwisely. so, lifting the heart up to her mouth, and sweetly kissing it,she proceeded thus. in all things, even till this instant, (beingthe utmost period of my life) i have evermore found my fathers lovemost effectuall to me; but now it appeareth farre greater, then at anytime heretofore: and therefore from my mouth, thou must deliver himthe latest thankes that ever i shall give him, for sending me suchan honourable present.
these words being ended, holding the cup fast in her hand, andlooking seriously upon the heart, she began againe in this manner.thou sweete entertainer of all my dearest delights, accursed be hiscruelty, that causeth me thus to see thee with my corporall eyes, itbeing sufficient enough for me, alwayes to behold thee with thesight of my soule. thou hast runne thy race, and as fortuneordained, so are thy dayes finished: for as all flesh hath anending; so hast thou concluded, albeit too soone, and before thy duetime. the travalles and miseries of this world, have now no more tomeddle with thee, and thy very heaviest enemy hath bestowed such agrave on thee, as thy greatnesse in vertue worthily deserveth; nownothing else is wanting, wherewith to beautifie thy funerall, but onlyher sighes and teares, that was so deare unto thee in thy life time.and because thou mightest the more freely enjoy them, see how mymercilesse father (on his owne meere motion) hath sent thee to me; andtruly i will bestow them frankly on thee, though once i hadresolved, to die with drie eyes, and not shedding one teare,dreadlesse of their utmost malice towards me.
and when i have given thee the due oblation of my teares, mysoule, which sometime thou hast kept most carfully, shall come to makea sweet conjunction with thine: for in what company else can itravaile more contentedly, and to those unfrequented silent shades,but onely in thine? as yet am sure it is present here, in this cupsent me by my father, as having a provident respect to the place,for possess' of our equall and mutuall pleasures; because thy souleaffecting mine so truly, cannot walke alone, without his dearecompanion.
having thus finished her complaint, even as if her bead had beenconverted into a well spring of water, so did teares abundantly flowfrom her faire eyes, kissing the heart of guiscardo infinite times.all which while, her women standing by her, neither knew what heart itwas, nor to what effect her speeches tended: but being moved tocompassionate teares, they often demanded (albeit in vaine) theoccasion of her sad complaining, comforting her to their utmost power.when she was not able to weepe any longer, wiping her eyes, andlifting up her head, without any signe of the least dismay, thus shespake to the heart.
deare heart, all my duty is performed to thee, and nothing nowremaineth uneffected; but onely breathing my last, to let my ghostaccompany thine.
then calling for the glasse of water, which she had readily preparedthe day before, and powring it upon the heart lying in the cup,couragiously advancing it to her mouth, she dranke it up every drop;which being done, she lay downe upon her bed, holding her lovers heartfast in her hand, and laying it so neere to her owne as she could. nowalthough her women knew not what water it was, yet when they had seeneher to quaffe it off in that manner, they sent word to the king, whomuch suspecting what had happened, went in all haste to hisdaughters chamber, entring at the very instant, when she was laideupon her bed; beholding her in such passionate pangs, with tearesstreaming downe his reverend beard, he used many kinde words tocomfort her: when boldly thus she spake unto him. father (quoth she)well may you spare these teares, because they are unfitting for you,and not any way desired by me; who but your selfe, hath seene anyman to mourne for his owne wilfull offence. neverthelesse, if butthe least jot of that love do yet abide in you, whereof you havemade such liberall profession to me; let me obtaine this my verylast request, to wit, that seeing i might not privately enjoy thebenefit of guiscardoes love, and while he lived, let yet (in death)one publike grave containe both our bodies, that death may affoord us,what you so cruelly in life denied us.
extremity of griefe and sorrow, withheld his tongue from returningany answer, and she perceiving her end approaching, held the heartstill closer to her owne bare brest, saying; here fortune, receive twotrue hearts latest oblation; for, in this manner are we comming tothee. so closing her eyes, all sense forsooke her, life leaving herbody breathlesse. thus ended the haplesse love of guiscardo, andghismonda, for whose sad disaster, when the king had mournedsufficiently, and repented fruitlesly; he caused both their bodiesto be honourably embalmed, and buried in a most royall monument; notwithout generall sorrow of the subjects of salerne.
the fourth day, the second novell
reprehending the lewd lives of dissembling hypocrites; and
checking the arrogant pride of vaine-headed women
fryar albert made a young venetian gentlewoman beleeve, that godcupid was falne in love with her, and he resorted oftentimes unto her,in the disguise of the same god. afterward, being frighted by thegentlewomans kindred and friends, he cast himselfe out of herchamber window, and was bidden in a poore mans house; on the dayfollowing, in the shape of a wilde or savage man, he was broughtupon the rialto of saint marke, and being there publikely knowne bythe brethren of his order, he was committed to prison.
the novell recounted by madam fiammetta, caused teares many times inthe eyes of all the company; but it being finished, the king shewing astearne countenance, saide; i should have much commended the kindnesseof fortune, if in the whole course of my life, i had tasted theleast moity of that delight, which guiscardo received by conversingwith faire ghismonda. nor neede any of you to wonder thereat, or howit can be otherwise, because hourely i feele a thousand dyingtorments, without enjoying any hope of ease or pleasure: but referringmy fortunes to their owne poore condition, it is my will, that madampampinea proceed next in the argument of successelesse love, accordingas madam fiammetta hath already begun, to let fall more dew-drops onthe fire of mine afflictions. madam pampinea perceiving what a taskewas imposed on her, knew well (by her owne disposition) theinclination of the company, whereof shee was more respective then ofthe kings command: wherefore, chusing rather to recreate theirspirits, then to satisfie the kings melancholy humour; shedetermined to relate a tale of mirthfull matter, and yet to keepewithin compasse of the purposed argument it hath bene continually usedas a common proverbe; that a bad man taken and reputed to be honestand good, may commit many evils, yet neither credited, or suspected:which proverbe giveth me very ample matter to speake of, and yet notvarying from our intention, concerning the hypocrisie of somereligious persons, who having their garments long and large, theirfaces made artificially pale, their language meeke and humble to getmens goods from them; yet sowre, harsh and stearne enough, in checkingand controuling other mens errours, as also in urging others togive, and themselves to take, without any other hope or meanes ofsalvation. nor doe they endeavour like other men, to worke out theirsoules health with feare and trembling; but, even as if they were soleowners, lords, and possessors of paradice, will appoint to every dyingperson, place (there) of greater or lesser excellency, according asthey thinke good, or as the legacies left by them are in quantity,whereby they not onely deceive themselves, but all such as give creditto their subtile perswasions. and were it lawfull for me, to makeknowne no more then is meerely necessary; i could quickly discloseto simple credulous people, what craft lieth concealed under theirholy habites: and i would wish, that their lies and deluding shouldspeed with them, as they did with a franciscane friar, none of theyounger novices, but one of them of greatest reputation, and belongingto one of the best monasteries in venice. which i am the ratherdesirous to report, to recreate your spirits, after your teares forthe death of faire ghismonda.
sometime (honourable ladies) there lived in the city of imola, a manof most lewd and wicked life; named, bertho de la messa, whoseshamelesse deedes were so well knowne to all the citizens, and wonsuch respect among them; as all his lies could not compasse anybeleefe, no, not when he delivered a matter of sound truth. wherefore,perceiving that his lewdnesse allowed him no longer dwelling there;like a desperate adventurer, he transported himselfe thence to venice,the receptacle of all foule sinne and abhomination, intending there toexercise his wonted bad behaviour, and live as wickedly as ever he haddone before. it came to passe, that some remorse of conscience tookehold of him, for the former passages of his dissolute life, and hepretended to be surprized with very great devotion, becomming muchmore catholike then any other man, taking on him the profession of afranciscane coldelier, and calling himselfe, fryar albert of imola.
in this habite and outward appearance, hee seemed to leade anaustere and sanctimonious life, highly commending penance andabstinence, never eating flesh, or drinking wine, but when he wasprovided of both in a close corner. and before any person could takenotice thereof, hee became (of a theefe) ruffian, forswearer, andmurtherer, as formerly he had-beene a great preacher; yet notabandoning the forenamed vices, when secretly he could put any of themin execution. moreover, being made priest, when he was celebratingmasse at the altar, if he saw himselfe to be observed by any; he wouldmost mournefully reade the passion of our saviour, as one whose tearescost him little, whensoever hee pleased to use them; so that, in ashort while, by his preaching and teares, he fed the humours of thevenetians so pleasingly, that they made him executor (well-neere) ofall their testaments, yea, many chose him as depositary or guardion oftheir monies; because he was both confessour and councellor, almost toall the men and women.
by this well seeming out-side of sanctity, the wolfe became ashepheard, and his renowne for holinesse was so famous in those parts,as saint frances himselfe had hardly any more. it fortuned, that ayoung gentlewoman, being somewhat foolish, wanton and proud minded,named madam lisetta de caquirino, wife to a wealthy merchant, who wentwith certaine gallies into flanders, and there lay as lieger longtime: in company of other gentlewomen, went to be confessed by thisghostly father; kneel. at his feete, although her heart was highenough, like a proud minded woman, (for venetians are presumptuous,vaine-glorious, and witted much like to their skittish gondoloes)she made a very short rehearsall of her sinnes. at length fryar albertdemanded of her, whether shee had any amorous friend or lover? herpatience being exceedingly provoked, stearne anger appeared in herlookes, which caused her to returne him this answer. how now sirdomine? what? have you no eyes in your head? can you not distinguishbetween mine, and these other common beauties? i could have loversenow, if i were so pleased; but those perfections remaining in me, arenot to be affected by this man, or that. how many beauties have youbeheld, any way answerable to mine, and are more fit for gods, thenmortals.
many other idle speeches shee uttered, in proud opinion of herbeauty, whereby friar albert presently perceived, that thisgentlewoman had but a hollow braine, and was fit game for folly toflye at; which made him instantly enamoured of her, and that beyondall capacity of resisting, which yet he referred to a further, andmore commodious time. neverthelesse, to shew himselfe an holy andreligious man now, he began to reprehend her, and told her plainely,that she was vain-glorious, and overcome with infinite follies.heereupon, him call.ed him a logger headed beast, and he knew notthe difference betweene an ordinary complexion, and beauty of thehighest merit. in which respect, friar albert, being loth to offendher any further; after confession was fully ended, let her passeaway among the other gentlewomen, she giving him divers disdainfulllookes.
within some few dayes after, taking one of his trusty brethren inhis company, he went to the house of madam lisetta, where requiring tohave some conference alone with her selfe; shee tooke him into aprivate parlor, and being there, not to be seene by any body, hefell on his knees before her, speaking in this manner. madam, forcharities sake, and in regard of your owne most gracious nature, ibeseech you to pardon those harsh speeches, which i used to you theother day, when you were with me at confession: because, the verynight ensuing thereon, i was chastised in such cruell manner, as i wasnever able to stirre forth of my bed, untill this very instantmorning; whereto the weake-witted gentlewoman thus replyed. and whoi pray you (quoth she) did chastise you so severely? i will tell youmadam, said friar albert, but it is a matter of admirable secrecie.
being alone by my selfe the same night in my dorter, and in veryserious devotion, according to my usuall manner: suddenly i saw abright splendour about me, and i could no sooner arise to discernewhat it might be, and whence it came, but i espied a very goodly younglad standing by me, holding a golden bow in his hand, and a richquiver of arrowes hanging at his backe. catching fast hold on my hood,against the ground he threw me rudely, trampling on me with his feete,and beating me with so many cruell blowes, that i thought my body tobe broken in peeces. then i desired to know, why he was so rigorous tome in his correction? because (quoth he) thou didst so saucily presumethis day, to reprove the celestiall beauty of madam lisetta, who (nextto my mother venus) i love most dearely. whereupon i perceived, he wasthe great commanding god cupid, and therefore i craved most humblypardon of him. i will pardon thee (quoth he) but upon thiscondition, that thou goe to her so soone as conveniently thou canst,and (by lowly humility) prevaile to obtaine her free pardon: whichif she will not vouchsafe to grant thee, then shall i in stearne angerreturne againe, and lay so many torturing afflictions on thee, thatall thy whole life time shall be most hatefull to thee. and what thedispleased god saide else beside, i dare not disclose, except youplease first to pardon me.
mistresse shallow-braine, being swolne big with this wind, like anempty bladder; conceived no small pride in hearing these words,constantly crediting them to be true, and therefore thus answered. didi not tel you father albert, that my beauty was celestiall? but isweare by my beauty, notwithstanding your idle passed arrogancy, iam heartily sorry for your so severe correction; which that it mayno more be inflicted on you, i do freely pardon you; yet with thisproviso, that you tell me what the god else saide unto you; wheretofryar albert thus replyed. madam, seeing you have so graciouslyvouchsafed to pardon me, i will thankfully tell you all: but youmust be very carefull and respective, that whatsoever i shallreveale unto you, must so closely be concealed, as no livingcreature in the world may know it; for you are the onely happy ladynow living, and that happinesse relleth on your silence andsecrecie: with solemne vowes and protestations she sealed up hermany promises, and then the fryar thus proceeded.
madam, the further charge imposed on me by god cupid, was to tellyou, that himselfe is so extremely enamored of your beauty, and youare become so gracious in his affection; as, many nights he hathcome to see you in your chamber, sitting on your pillow, while youslept sweetly, and desiring very often to awake you, but onely fearingto affright you. wherefore, now he sends you word by me, that onenight he intendeth to come visite you, and to spend some time inconversing with you. but in regard he is a god, and meerely a spiritin forme, whereby neither you or any else have capacity of beholdinghim, much lesse to touch or feele him: he saith that (for your sake)he will come in the shape of a man, giving me charge also to know ofyou, when you shall please to have him come, and in whose similitudeyou would have him to come, whereof he will not falle; in whichrespect, you may justly thinke your selfe to be the onely happywoman livng, and farre beyond all other in your good fortune.
mistresse want-wit presently answered, shee was well contented, thatgod cupid should love her, and she would returne the like loveagaine to him; protesting withill, that wheresoever shee should seehis majesticall picture, she would set a hallowed burning taper beforeit. moreover, at all times he should be most welcome to her,whensoever hee would vouchsafe to visite her; for, he should alwayesfinde her alone in her private chamber: on this condition, that hisolde love psyches, and all other beauties else whatsoever, must be setaside, and none but her selfe onely to be his best mistresse,referring his personall forme of appearance, to what shape himselfebest pleased to assume, so that it might not be frightfull, oroffensive to her.
madam (quoth friar albert) most wisely have you answered, andleave the matter to me; for i will take order sufficiently, and toyour contentment. but you may do me a great grace, and without anyprejudice to your selfe, in granting me one poore request; namely,to vouchsafe the gods appearance to you, in my bodily shape andperson, and in the perfect forme of a man as now you behold me: so mayyou safely give him entertainment, without any taxation of theworld, or ill apprehension of the most curious inquisition. beside,a greater happinesse can never befall me: for, while he assumeth thesoule out of my body, and walketh on the earth in my humane figure:i shall be wandering in the joyes of lovers paradise, feeling thefruition of their felicities; which are such, as no mortality can becapeable of, no, not so much as in imagination.
the wise gentlewoman replied, that she was well contented, inregard of the severe punishment inflicted on him by god cupid, for thereproachfull speeches he had given her; to allow him so poore akinde of consolation, as he had requested her to grant him. whereupponfriar albert saide: be ready then madam to give him welcome tomorrow in the evening, at the entering into your house, for comming inan humane body, he cannot but enter at your doores: n e whereas, if(in powerfull manner) he made use of his wings, he then would eye inat your window, and then you could not be able to see him.
upon this conclusion, albert departed, leaving lisetta in nomeane pride of imagination, that god cupid should be enamoured ofher beauty; and therefore she thought each houre a yeare, till shemight see him in the mortall shape of friar albert. and now was hisbraine wonderfully busied, to visite her in more then common or humanemanner; and therefore he made him a sute (close to his body) ofwhite taffata, all poudred over with starres, and spangles of gold,a bow and quiver of arrowes, with wings also fastened to his backebehinde him, and all cunningly covered with his friars habit, whichmust be the sole meanes of his safe passage.
having obtained licence of his superiour, and being accompaniedwith an holy brother of the convent, yet ignorant of the businesseby him intended; he went to the house of a friend of his, which washis usuall receptacle, whensoever he went about such deeds of darknes.there did he put on his dissembled habit of god cupid, with hiswinges, bowe, and quiver, in formall fashion; and then (clouded overwith his monkes cowle) leaves his companion to awaite his returningbacke, while he visited foolish lisetta, according to her expectation,readily attending for the gods arrivall.
albert being come to the house, knocked at the doore, and the maideadmitting him entrance, according as her mistresse had appointed,she conducted him to her mistresses chamber, where laying aside hisfriars habite, and she seeing him shine with such glorioussplendour, adding action also to his assumed dissimulation, withmajesticke motion of his body, wings, and bow, as if he had bene godcupid indeede, converted into a body much bigger of stature, thenpainters commonly do describe him, her wisedome was overcome withfeare and admiration, that she fell on her knees before him,expressing all humble reverence unto him. and he spreading his wingsover her, as with wiers and strings he had made them pliant; shewedhow graciously he accepted her humiliation; folding her in hisarmes, and sweetly kissing her many times together, with repetition ofhis entire love and affection towards her. so delicately was heperfumed with odorifferous savours, and so compleate of person inhis spangled garments, that she could do nothing else, but wonder athis rare behaviour, reputing her felicity beyond all womens in theworld, and utterly impossible to be equalled, such was the pride ofher presuming. for he told her clivers tales and fables, of hisawefull power among the other gods, and stolne pleasures of his uponthe earth; yet gracing her praises above all his other loves, andvowes made now, to affect none but her onely, as his often visitationsshould more constantly assure her, that she verily credited all hisprotestations, and thought his kisses and embraces, farre to exceedany mortall comparison.
after they had spent so much time in amorous discoursing, as mightbest fit with this their first meeting, and stand cleare fromsuspition on either side: our albert cupid, or cupid albert, whichof them you best please to terme him, closing his spangled wingestogether againe behinde his backe, fastening also on his bow andquiver of arrowes, overclouds all with his religious monkes cowle, andthen with a parting kisse or two, returned to the place where he hadleft his fellow and companion, perhaps imployed in as devout anexercise, as he had bin in his absence from him; whence both repayringhome to the monastery, all this nightes wandering was allowed astollerable, by them who made no spare of doing the like.on the morrow following, madam lisetta immediately after dinner,being attended by her chamber-maid, went to see friar albert,finding him in his wonted forme and fashion, and telling him whathad hapned betweene her and god cupid, with all the other lies andtales which hee had told her. truly madam (answered albert) whatyour successe with him hath beene, i am no way able to comprehend; butthis i can assure you, that so soone as i had acquainted him with youranswer, i felt a sodaine rapture made of my soule, and visibly (tomy apprehension) saw it carried by elves and fairies, into thefloury fields about elisium, where lovers departed out of this life,walke among the beds of lillies and roses, such as are not in thisworld to be seene, neither to be imagined by any humane capacity. sosuper-abounding was the pleasure of this joy and solace, that, howlong i continued there, or by what meanes i was transported hitheragaine this morning, it is beyond all ability in mee to expresse, orhow i assumed my body againe after that great god had made use thereofto your service. well fryar albert (quoth shee) you may see what anhappinesse hath befalne you, by so grosse an opinion of myperfections, and what a felicity you enjoy, and still are like todo, by my pardoning your error, and granting the god accesse to mein your shape: which as i envy not, so i wish you heereafter to bewiser, in taking upon you to judge of beauty. much other idle follyproceeded from her, which still he soothed to her contentment, and (asoccasion served) many meetings they had in the former manner.
it fortuned within few dayes after that madam lisetta being incompany with one of her gossips, and their conference (as commonlyit falleth out to be) concerning other women of the city; theirbeauty, behaviour, amorous suters and servants, and generall opinionconceived of their worth, and merit; wherein lisetta was over-muchconceyted of her selfe, not admitting any other to be her equall.among other speeches, savouring of an unseasoned braine: gossip (quothshe) if you knew what account is made of my beauty, and who holdesit in no meane estimation, you would then freely confesse, that ideserve to be preferred before any other. as women are ambitious intheir owne opinions, so commonly are they covetous of one anotherssecrets, especially in matter of emulation, whereupon the gossipthus replyed. beleeve me madam, i make no doubt but your speechesmay be true, in regard of your admired beauty, and many otherperfections beside; yet let me tell you, priviledges, how great andsingular soever they be, without they are knowen to others, besidesuch as do particularly enjoy them; they carry no more account, thenthings of ordinary estimation. whereas on the contrary, when anylady or gentlewoman hath some eminent and peculiar favour, which fewor none other can reach unto, and it is made famous by generallnotion; then do all women else admire and honor her, as the glory oftheir kinde, and a miracle of nature.
i perceive gossip said lisetta, whereat you aime, and such is mylove to you, as you should not lose your longing in this case, werei but constantly secured of your secrecy, which as hitherto i havebene no way able to taxe, so would i be loth now to be more suspitiousof then needs. but yet this matter is of such maine moment, that ifyou will protest as you are truly vertuous, never to reveale it to anyliving body, i will disclose to you almost a miracle. the vertuousoath being past, with many other solemne protestations beside, lisettathen pro. ceeded in this maner.
i know gossip, that it is a matter of common and ordinary custome,for ladies and gentlewomen to be graced with favourites, men of fraileand mortall conditions, whose natures are as subject to inconstancy,as their very best endevours dedicated to folly, as i could name nomean number of our ladies heere in venice. but when soveraigne deitiesshall feele the impression of our humane desires, and beholdsubjects of such prevailing efficacy, as to subdue their greatestpower, yea, and make them enamored of mortall creatures: you maywell imagine gossip, such a beauty is superiour to any other. and suchis the happy fortune of your friend lisetta, of whose perfections,great cupid the awefull commanding god of love himselfe, conceivedsuch an extraordinary liking: as he hath abandoned his seate ofsupreme majesty, and appeared to in the shape of a mortall man, withlively expression of his amourous passions, and what extremities ofanguish he hath endured, onely for my love. may this be possible?replied the gossip. can the gods be toucht with the apprehension ofour fraile passions? true it is gossip, answered and so certainlytrue, that his sacred kisses, sweete embraces, and most pleasingspeeches with proffer of his continuall devotion towards me, hathgiven me good cause to confirme what i say, and to thinke myfelicity farre beyond all other womens, being honoured with hisoften nightly visitations.
the gossip inwardly smiling at her idle speeches, which(nevertheles) she avouched with very vehement asseverations: fellinstantly sicke of womens naturall disease, thinking every minute atedious month, till she were in company with some other gossips, tobreake the obligation of her vertuous promise, and that others (aswell as her selfe) might laugh at the folly of this shallow-wittedwoman. the next day following, it was her hap to be at a wedding,among a great number of other women, whom quickly she acquaintedwith this so strange a wonder; as they did the like to their husbands:and passing so from hand to hand, in lesse space then two dayes, allvenice was fully possessed with it. among the rest, the brethren tothis foolish woman, heard this admirable newes concerning theirsister; and they discreetly concealing it to themselves, closelyconcluded to watch the walks of this pretended god: and if he soarednot too lofty a flight, they would clip his wings, to come thebetter acquainted with him. it fortuned, that the friar hearing hiscupidicall visitations over-publikely discovered, purposed to checkand reprove lisetta for her indiscretion. and being habitedaccording to his former manner, his friarly cowle covering all hisformer bravery, he left his companion where he used to stay, andclosely walked along unto the house. no sooner was he entred, butthe brethren being ambushed neere to the doore, went in after him, andascending the staires, by such time as he had uncased himselfe, andappeared like god cupid, with his spangled wings displayed: theyrushed into the chamber, and he having no other refuge, opened a largecasement, standing directly over the great gulfe or river, andpresently leapt into the water; which being deepe, and he skilfullin swimming, he had no other harme by his fall, albeit the sodaineaffright did much perplex him.
recovering the further side of the river, he espied a light, and thedoore of an house open, wherein dwelt a poore man, whom he earnestlyintreated, to save both his life and reputation, telling him many liesand tales by what meanes he was thus disguised, and throwne bynight-walking villaines into the water. the poore man, being movedto compassionate his distressed estate, laid him in his owne bed,ministring such other comforts to him, as the time and his poverty didpermit; and day drawing on, he went about his businesse, advisinghim to take his rest, and it should not be long till he returned.so, locking the doore, and leaving the counterfet god in bed, awaygoes the poore man to his daily labor. the brethren to lisetta,perceiving god cupid to be fied and gone, and she in melanchollysadnesse sitting by them: they tooke up the reliques he had leftbehind him, i meane the friars hood and cowle, which shewing totheir sister, and sharpely reproving her unwomanly behaviour: theyleft her in no meane discomfort, returning home to their ownehouses, with their conquered spolle of the forlorne friar.
during the times of these occurrences, broad day speeding on, andthe poore man returning homeward by the rialto, to visit his guestso left in bed: he beheld divers crouds of people, and a generallrumor noysed among them, that god cupid had bene that night with madamlisetta, where being over-closely pursued by her brethren, for feareof being surprized, he leapt out of her window into the gulfe, andno one could tell what was become of him. heereupon, the poore manbegan to imagine, that the guest entertained by him in the night time,must needs be the same suppose god cupid, as by his wings and otherembellishments appeared: wherefore being come home, and sittingdowne on the beds side by him, after some few speeches passingbetweene them, he knew him to be friar albert, who promised to givehim fifty ducates, if he would not betray him to lisettaes brethren.upon the acceptation of this offer, the money being sent for, andpaied downe; there wanted nothing now, but some apt and convenientmeanes, whereby albert might safely be conveyed into the monastery,which being wholly referred to the poore mans care and trust, thushe spake. sir, i see no likely-hood of your cleare escaping home,except in this manner as i advise you. we observe this day as amerry festivall, and it is lawfull for any one, to disguise a man inthe skin of a beare, or in the shape of a savage man, or any otherforme of better advice. which being so done, he is brought upon s.markes market place, where being hunted a while with dogs, upon thehuntings conclusion, the feast is ended; and then each man leadeshis monster whether him pleaseth. if you can accept any of theseshapes, before you be seene heere in my poore abiding, then can isafely (afterward) bring you where you would be. otherwise, i see nopossible meanes, how you may escape hence unknown; for it is withoutall question to the contrary, that the gentlewomans brethren,knowing your concealment in some one place or other, wil set suchspies and watches for you throughout the city, as you must needs betaken by them.
now, although it seemed a most severe imposition, for albert topasse in any of these disguises: yet his exceeding feare oflisettaes brethren and friends, made him gladly yeelde, and to undergowhat shape the poore man pleased, which thus he ordered. annointinghis naked body with hony, he then covered it over with downy smallfeathers, and fastening a chaine about his necke, and a strange uglyvizard on his face, he gave him a great staffe in the one hand, andtwo huge mastive dogs chained together in the other, which he hadborrowed in the butchery. afterward, he sent a man to the rialto,who there proclaimed by the sound of trumpet: that all such as desiredto see god cupid, which the last nights had descended downe from theskies, and fell (by ill hap) into the venetian gulfe, let them repaireto the publike market place of s. marke, and there he would appeare inhis owne likenesse.
this being done, soone after he left his house, and leading him thusdisguised along by the chaine, he was followed by great crowds ofpeople, every one questioning of whence, and what he was. in whichmanner, he brought him, to the market place, where an infinitenumber of people were gathered together, as well of the followers,as of them that before heard the proclamation. there he made choice ofa pillar, which stood in a place somewhat highly exalted, wherto hechained his savage man, making shew, as if be meant to awaite there,till the hunting should begin: in which time, the flies, waspes, andhornets, did so terribly sting his naked body, being annointed withhony, that he endured therby unspeakable anguish. when the poore mansaw, that there needed no more concourse of people; pretending, asif he purposed to let loose his salvage man; he tooke the maske orvizard from alberts face, and then he spake aloud in this manner.gentlemen and others, seeing the wilde boare commeth not to ourhunting, because i imagine that he cannot easily be found: i meane (tothe end you may not lose your labour in comming hither) to shew youthe great god of love called cupid, who poets feigned long since to bea little boy, but now growne to manly stature. you see in what manerhe hath left his high dwelling onely for the comfort of our venetianbeauties: but belike, the night-fogs overflagging his wings, he fellinto our gulfe, and comes now to present his service to you. no soonerhad he taken off his vizard, but every one knew him to be fryaralbert; and sodainely arose such shoutes outcries, with most bitterwords breathed forth against him, hurling also stones, durt andfilth in his face, that his best acquaintance then could take noknowledge of him, and not any one pittying his abusing. so longcontinued the offended people in their fury, that the newes therof wascarried to the convent, and six of his religious brethren came, whocasting an habite about him, and releasing him from his chaine, theyled him to the monastery, not without much mollestation and trouble ofthe people; where imprisoning him in their house, severity of someinflicted punishment, or rather conceite for his open shame,shortned his dayes, and so he dyed. thus you see (fayre ladies) whenlicentious life must be clouded with a cloake of sanctifie, andevill actions daylie committed, yet escaping uncredited: there willcome a time at length, for just discovering of all, that the goodmay shine in their true luster of glory, and the bad sinke in theirowne deserved shame.
the fourth day, the third novell
heerein is declared, how dangerous the occasion is, ensuing by
anger and despight, in such as entirely love, especially
being injuried and offended by them that they love
three yong gentlemen affecting three sisters, fledde with theminto candie. the eldest of them (through jealousie) becommeth thedeath of her lover; the second, by consenting to the duke of candiesrequest, is the meanes of saving her life. afterward, her ownefriend killeth her, and thence flyeth away with the elder sister.the third couple, are charged with her death, and being committedprisoners, they confesse the fact; and fearing death, by corruption ofmoney they prevaile with their keepers, escaping from thence torhodes, where they dyed in great poverty.
when the king perceyved that madame pampinea had ended herdiscourse, he sat sadly a pretty while, without uttering one word, butafterward spake thus. little goodnesse appeared in the beginning ofthis novell, because it ministred occasion of mirth; yet the endingproved better, and i could wish, that worse inflictions had falne onthe venerious friar. then turning towards madam lauretta, he said;lady, do you tell us a better tale, if possible it may be. shesmiling, thus answered the king: sir, you are over-cruelly bentagainst poore lovers, in desiring, that their amourous processionsshould have harsh and sinister concludings. neverthelesse, inobedience to your severe command, among three persons amourouslyperplexed, i will relate an unhappy ending; whereas all may be saideto speede as unfortunately, being equally alike, in enjoying the issueof their desires, and thus i purpose to proceed.
every vice (choice ladies) as very well you know, redoundeth tothe great disgrace and prejudice of him, or her, by whom it ispractised, and oftentimes to others. now, among those commonhurtfull enemies, the sinne or vice which most carrieth us with fullcarrere, and draweth us into unadvoydable dangers (in mine opinion)seemeth to be that of choller or anger, which is a sodain andinconsiderate moving, provoked by some received injury, which havingexcluded all respect of reason, and dimnd (with darke vapors) thebright discerning sight of the understanding, enflameth the minde withmost violent fury. and albeit this inconvenience hapneth most tomen, and more to some few then others, yet notwithstanding, it hathbene noted, that women have felt the selfesame infirmity, and inmore extreme manner, because it much sooner is kindled in them, andburneth with the brighter flame, in regard they have the lesserconsideration, and therefore not to be wondred at. for if we wiladvisedly observe, we shall plainely perceive, that fire even of hisowne nature) taketh hold on such things as are light and tender,much sooner then it can on hard and weighty substances; and some of uswomen (let men take no offence at my words) are farre more soft anddelicate then they be, and therefore more fraile. in which regard,seeing wee are naturally enclined hereto, and considering also, howmuch our affability and gentlenesse do shew themselves pleasing andfull of content to those men with whom we are to live; and likewise,how anger and fury are compacted of extraordinary perils: i purpose(because we may be the more valiant in our courage, to outstand thefierce assaults of wrath and rage) to shew you by mine ensuing novell,how the loves of three yong gentlemen, and of as many gentlewomen,came to fatall and fortunat successe by the tempestuous anger of oneamong them, as i have formerly related unto you.
marseilles (as you are not now to learne) is in provence; seatedon the sea, and is also a very ancient and most noble citty, whichhath bene (heeretofore) inhabited with farre richer and more wealthymerchants, then at this instant time it is. among whom, there wasone named narnaldo civida, a man but of meane condition, yet cleare infaith and reputation, and in lands, goods, and ready monies,immeasurably rich. many children he had by his wife, among whom werethree daughters, which exceeded his sonnes in yeeres. two of thembeing twinnes, and borne of one body, were counted to be fifteeneyeeres old; the third was foureteene, and nothing hindered marriage intheir parents owne expectation but the returne home of narnaldo, whowas then abroad in spaine with his merchandizes. the eldest of thesesisters was named ninetta, the second magdalena, and the thirdbertella. a gentleman (albeit but poore in fortunes) and calledrestagnone, was so extraordinarily enamoured of ninetta, as no manpossibly could be more, and she likewise as earnest in affectiontowards him; yet both carrying their loves proceeding with suchsecrecy, as long time they enjoyed their hearts sweet contentment, yetundiscovered.
it came to passe, that two other young gallants, the one namedfolco, and the other hugnetto, (who had attained to incredible wealth,by the decease of their father) were also as far in love, the one withmagdalena, and the other with bertella. when restagnone hadintelligence thereof, by the meanes of his faire friend ninetta, hepurposed to releeve his poverty, by friendly furthering both theirlove, and his owne: and growing into familiarity with them, onewhile he would walke abroad with folco, and then againe with hugnetto,but oftner with them both together, to visite their mistresses, andcontinue worthy friendship. on a day, when hee saw the time suteableto his intent, and that hee had invited the two gentlemen home untohis house, he fell into this like conference with them.
kinde friends (quoth he) the honest familiarity which hath pastbetweene us, may render you some certaine assurance, of the constantlove i beare to you both, being as willing to worke any meanes thatmay tend to your good, as i desire to compasse and because the truthof mine affection cannot conceale it selfe to you, i meane to acquaintyou with an intention, wherewith my braine hath a long while travelledand now may soone be delivered of, if it may passe with your likingand approbation. let me then tell you, that except your speechessavour of untruth, and your actions carry a double understaning, incommon behaviour both by night and day, you appeare to and consumeaway, in the cordiall love you beare to two of the sisters, as isuffer the same afflictions for the third, with reciprocall. requitallof their deerest affection to us. now, to qualifie the heate of ourtormenting flames, if you will condescend to such a course as ishall advise you, the remedy will yeild them equall ease to ours,and we may safely injoy the benefit of contentment. as wealthaboundeth with you both, so doth want most extremely tyrannize overme: but if one banke might be made of both your rich substances, iembraced therein as a third partaker, and some quarter of the worlddissigned out by us, where to live at hearts ease upon yourpossessions, i durst engage my credit, that all the sisters (notmeanely stored with their fathers treasure) shall beare us companyto what place soever we please. there each man freely enjoying hisowne deerest love, may live like three brethren, without anyhinderance to our mutuall content: it remaineth now in yougentlemen, to accept this comfortable offer, or to refuse it.
the two brothers, whose pass exceeded their best means forsupport, perceiving some hope how to enjoy their loves; desired nolong time of deliberation, or greatly disputed with their thoughtswhat was best to be done: but readily replyed, that let happen anydanger whatsoever, they would joyne with him in this determination,and he should partake with them in their wealthiest fortunes. afterrestagnone had heard their answer, within some few dayes following, hewent to confer with ninetta, which was no easie matter for him tocompasse. neverthelesse, opportunity proved so favourable to him, thatmeeting with her at a private place appointed, he discoursed at large,what had passed betweene him and the other two young gentlemen,maintaining the same with many good reasons, to have her like andallow of the enterprize. which although (for a while) he could veryhardly doe; yet, in regard shee had more desire then power, withoutsuspition to be daily in his company, she thus answered. my heartschosen friend, i cannot any way mislike your advice, and will takesuch order with my sisters, that they shal agree to our resolution.let it therefore be your charge, that you and the rest make everything ready, to depart from hence so soone, as with best convenientmeanes we may be enabled.
restagnone being returned to folco and hugnetto, who thoughteverie houre a yeare, to heare what would succeede upon the promisepast between them; he told them in plain termes, that their ladieswere as free in consent as they, and nothing wanted now, butfurnishment for their sodaine departing. having concluded, that candyeshould bee their harbour for entertainment, they made sale of some fewinheritances which lay the readiest for the purpose, as also the goodsin their houses; and then, under colour of venting merchandizesabroad, they bought a nimble pinnace, fortified with good strength andpreparation, and wayted but for a convenient winde. on the other side,ninetta who was sufficiently acquainted with the forwardnesse of hersisters desires, and her owne, had so substantially prevailed withthem, that a good voyage now was the sole expectation. whereupon,the same night when they should set away, they opened a stronkbarred chest of their fathers, whence they tooke great store of goldand costly jewels, wherewith escaping secretly out of the house;they came to the place where their lovers attended for them, and goingall aboord the pinnace, the windes were so furtherous to them, thatwithout touching any where, the night following, they arrived atgeneway.there being out of perill or pursuit, they all knit the knot ofholy wedlocke, and then freely enjoyed their long wished desires, fromwhence setting saile againe, and being well furnished with allthings wanting passing on from port to port, at the end of eightdayes, they landed in candie, not meeting with any impeachment onthe way. determining there to spend their daies, first they providedthemselves of goodly land in the countrey, and then of beautifulldwelling houses in the city, with al due furnishments belonging tothem, and families well beseeming such worthy gentlemen, and alldelights else for their dally recreations, inviting their. neighbours,and they them againe in loving manner; so that no lovers could wish tolive in more ample contentment.
passing on their time in this height of felicity, and not crossed byany sinister accidents, it came to passe (as often wee may obseryein the like occasions, that although delights doe most especiallyplease us, yet they breede surfet, when they swell too over-great inabundance) that restagnone, who most deerely affected his faireninetta, and had her now in his free possession, without any perill ofloosing her: grew now also to bee weary of her, and consequently, tofaile in those familiar performances, which formerly had passedbetweene them. for, being one day invited to a banket, hee saw there abeautifull gentlewoman of that countrey, whose perfections pleasinghim beyond all comparison: he laboured (by painfull pursuite) to winhis purpose; and meeting with her in divers private places, grewprodigall in his expences upon her. this could not be so closelycarried, but being seene and observed by ninetta, she became possessedwith such extreame jealousie, that hee could not doe any thingwhatsoever, but immediately she had knowledge of it: which fire,growing to a flame in her, her patience became extreamely provoked,urging rough and rude speeches from her to him, and daily tormentinghim beyond power of sufferance.
as the enjoying of any thing in too much plenty, makes it appeareirkesome and loathing to us, and the deniall of our desires, do moreand more whet on the appetite: even so did the angry spleen of ninettaproceed on in violence, against this new commenced love of restagnone.for, in succession of time, whether he enjoyed the embracements of hisnew mistresse, or no: yet ninetta (by sinister reports, but muchmore through her owne jealous imaginations) held it for infallible,and to bee most certaine. heereupon, she fell into an extreamemelancholly, which melancholly begat implacable fury, and(consequently) such contemptible disdaine, as converted her formerlykindely love to restagnone, into most cruell and bloudie hatred;yea, and so strangely was reason or respect confounded in her, as norevenge else but speed death, might satisfie the wrongs sheeimagined to receive by restagnone and his minion.
upon enquiry, by what meanes shee might best compasse her bloodyintention, she grew acquainted with a grecian woman, and wonderfullyexpert in the compounding of poysons, whom shee so perswaded bygifts and bounteous promises, that at the length shee prevayled withher. a deadly water was distilled by her, which (without any othercounsell to the contrary) on a day when restagnone had his bloodsomewhat over-heated, and little dreamed on any such treason conspiredagainst him by his wife, shee caused him to drinke a great draughtthereof, under pretence, that it was a most soveraigne and cordiallwater; but such was the powerfull operation thereof, that the verynext morning, restagnone was found to bee dead in his bed. when hisdeath was understoode by folco, hugnetto, and their wives, and notknowing how hee came to bee thus empoysoned (because their sisterseemed to bemoane his sodaine death, with as apparant shewes ofmourning, as they could possibly expresse) they buried him veryhonourably, and so all suspition ceased.
but as fortune is infinite in her fagaries, never acting disaster soclosely, but as cunningly discovereth it againe: so it came topasse, that within a few dayes following, the grecian woman that haddelivered the poyson to ninetta, for such another deede ofdamnation, was apprehended even in the action. and being put upon hetortures, among many other horrid villanies her committed, sheconfessed the empoysoning of restagnone, and every particle theretoappertaining. whereupon, the duke of candie, without any noyse orpublication, setting a strong guard (in the night time) about thehouse of folco, where ninetta then was lodged; there sodainly theyseized on her, and upon examination, in maintenance of desperaterevenge, voluntarily confessed the fact, and what else concerned theoccasion of his death, by the wrongs which he had offered her.
folco and hugnetto understanding secretly, both from the duke, andother intimate friends, what was the reason of ninettaes apprehension,which was not a little displeasing to them, labored by all theirbest paines and endeavour, to worke such meanes with the duke, thather life might not perish by fire, although she had most justlydeserved it; but all theyr attempts proved to no effect, because theduke had concluded to execute justice.
heere you are to observe, that magdalena (beeing a very beautifullwoman, yong, and in the choisest flower of her time:) had often beforebene solicited by the duke, to entertaine his love and kindnesse:whereto by no meanes she would listen or give consent. and being nowmost earnestly importuned by her for the safetie of her sisterslife, hee tooke hold on this her dayly suite to him, and in privatetold her, that if she was so desirous of ninettaes life: it lay in herpower to obtain it, by granting him the fruition of her love. sheapparantly perceiving that ninetta was not likely to live, but bythe prostitution of her chaste honour, which she preferred beforethe losse of her owne life, or her sisters, concluded to let her dye,rather then run into any such disgrace. but having an excellentingenious wit, quicke, and apprehensive in perillous occasions, sheintended now to make a triall of overreaching the lascivious duke inhis wanton purpose, and yet to be assured of her sisters life, withoutany blemish to her reputation.
soliciting him still as shee was wont to doe, this promise passedfrom her to him, that when ninetta was delivered out of prison, and insafetie at home in her house: hee should resort thither in some queintdisguise, and enjoy his long expected desire; but untill then shewould not yeeld. so violent was the duke in the prosecution of hispurpose, that under colour of altering the manner of ninettaesdeath, not suffering her to bee consumed by fire, but to be drowned,according to a custome observed there long time, and at theimportunity of her sister magdalena, in the still silence of thenight, ninetta was conveyed into a sacke, and sent in that manner tothe house of folco, the duke following soone after, to challenge herpromise.
magdalena, having acquainted her husband with her vertuousintention, for preserving her sisters life, and disappointing the dukein his wicked desire; was as contrary to her true meaning in thiscase, as ninetta had formerly beene adverse to restagnone, onely beingover-ruled likewise by jealousie, and perswaded in his rash opinion,that the duke had already dishonoured magdalena, otherwise, he wouldnot have delivered ninetta out of prison. mad fury gave further fireto this unmanly perswasion, and nothing will now quench this but thelife of poore magdalena, suddenly sacrificed in the rescue of hersister, such a divell is anger, when the understandings bright eyeis thereby abused. no credit might bee given to her womanlyprotestations, or any thing seeme to alter his bloody purpose; but,having slaine magdalena with his poniard (notwithstanding her tearesand humble entreaties) he ranne in haste to ninettaes chamber, she notdreaming on any such desperate accident, and to her he used thesedissembling speeches.
sister (quoth he) my wife hath advised, that i should speedilyconvey you hence, as fearing the renewing of the dukes fury, andyour falling againe into the hands of justice: i have a barkereadily prepared for you, and your life being secured, it is allthat she and i doe most desire. ninetta being fearefull, and no waydistrusting what he had saide; in thankfull allowance of her sisterscare, and curteous tender of his so ready service; departed thencepresently with him, not taking any farewell of her other sister andher husband. to the seashore they came, very weakely provided ofmonies to defray their charges, and getting aboard the barke, directedtheir course themselves knew not whether.
the amorous duke in his disguise, having long daunced attendanceat folcoes doore, and no admittance of his entrance; angerlyreturned backe to his court, protesting severe revenge on magdalena,if she gave him not the better satisfaction, to cleare her from thusbasely abusing him. on the morrow morning, when magdalena was foundmurthered in her chamber, and tidings thereof carried to the duke;present search was made for the bloody offendor, but folco beingfled and gone with ninetta; some there were, who bearing deadly hatredto hugnetto, incensed the duke against him and his wife, assupposing them to be guilty of magdalenaes death. he being theretovery easily perswaded, in regard of his immoderate love to theslaine gentlewoman; went himselfe in person (attended on by his guard)to hugnettoes house, where both he and his wife were seized asprisoners.
these newes were very strange to them, and their imprisonment asunwelcome; and although they were truly inocent, either in knowledgeof the horrid fact, or the departure of folco with ninetta: yetbeing unable to endure the tortures extremity, they made themselvesculpable by confession, and that they had a hand with folco in themurder of magdalena. upon this their forced confession, and sentenceof death pronounced on them by the duke himselfe; before the dayappointed for their publike execution, by great summes of money, whichthey had closely hid in their house, to serve when any urgentextremitie should happen to them; they corrupted their keepers, andbefore any intelligence could be had of their flight, they escapedby sea to rhodes, where they lived afterward in great distresse andmisery. the just vengeance of heaven followed after folco and ninetta,he for murthering his honest wife, and she for poysoning her offendinghusband: for being beaten a long while on the seas, by tempestuousstormes and weather, and not admitted landing in any port or creeke;they were driven backe on the coast of candie againe, where beingapprehended, and brought to the city before the duke, they confessedtheir several notorious offences, and ended their loathed lives in onefire together.
thus the idle and loose love of restagnone, with the frantickerage and jealousie of ninetta and folco, overturned all their longcontinued happinesse, and threw a disastrous ending on them all.
the fourth day, the fourth novell
in commendation of justice betweene princes; and declaring
withall, that neither feare, dangers, nor death it selfe,
can any way daunt a true and loyall lover
gerbino, contrary to the former plighted faith of hisgrand-father, king gulielmo, fought with a ship at sea, belonging tothe king of thunis, to take away his daughter, who was then in thesame ship. shee being slaine by them that had the possession of her,he likewise slew them; and afterward had his owne head smitten off.
madam lauretta having concluded her novel, and the companycomplaining on lovers misfortunes, some blaming the angry andjealous fury of ninetta, and every one delivering their severallopinions; the king, as awaking out of a passionate perplexity, exaltedhis lookes, giving a signe to madame elisa, that shee should follownext in order, whereto she obeying, began in this manner. i have heard(gracious ladies, quoth she) of many people, who are verily perswaded,that loves arrowes, never wound any body, but onely by the eyes lookesand gazes, mocking and scorning such as maintaine that men may fall inlove by hearing onely. wherein (beleeve me) they are greatly deceived,as will appeare by a novell which i must now relate unto you, andwherein you shall plainely perceive, that not onely fame or reportis as prevailing as sight; but also hath conducted divers, to awretched and miserable ending of their lives.
gulielmo the second, king of sicilie, according as the sicilianchronicles record, had two children, the one a sonne, named donrogero, and the other a daughter, called madame constance. the saiderogero died before his father, leaving a sonne behind him, namedgerbino, who, with much care and cost, was brought up by hisgrand-father, proving to be a very goodly prince, and wonderouslyesteemed for his great valour and humanity. his fame could notcontaine it selfe, within the bounds or limits of sicilie onely, butbeing published very prodigally, in many parts of the world beside,flourished with no meane commendations throughout all barbarie,which in those dayes was tributary to the king of sicilie. among otherpersons, deserving most to be respected, the renowned vertues, andaffability of this gallant prince gerbino, was understood by thebeautious daughter to the king of tunis, who by such as bad seene her,was reputed to be one of the rarest creatures, the best conditioned,and of the truest noble spirit, that ever nature framed in her verychoicest pride of art.
of famous, vertuous, and worthy men, it was continually her cheefestdelight to heare, and the admired actions of valiant gerbino, reportedto her by many singular discoursers: such as could best describehim, with language answerable to his due deservings, won suchhonourable entertainment in her understanding soule, that they weremost affectionately pleasing to her, and in recapitulating (over andover againe) his manifold and heroycall perfections; meere speech madeher extreamely amorous of him, nor willingly would she lend an eare toany other discourse, but that which tended to his honour andadvancement.
on the other side, the fame of her incomparable beauty, withaddition of her other infinite singularities beside; as the worldhad given eare to innumberlesse places, so sicilie came at lengthacquainted therewith, in such flowing manner, as was trulyanswerable to her merit. nor seemed this as a bare babling rumour,in the princely hearing of royall gerbino; but was embraced withsuch a reall apprehension, and the entire probation of a trueunderstanding: that he was no lesse enflamed with noble affectiontowards her, then she expressed the like in vertuous opinion of him.wherefore, awaiting such convenient opportunity, when he might entreatlicense of his grand-father, for his owne going to thunis, undercolour of some honourable occasion, for the earnest desire he had tosee her: he gave charge to some of his especiall friends (whoseaffaires required their presence in those parts) to let theprincesse understand, in such secret manner as best they could devise,what noble affection he bare unto her, devoting himselfe onely toher service.
one of his chosen friends thus put in trust, being a jeweller, a manof singular discretion, and often resorting to ladies for sight of hisjewels, winning like admittance to the princesse: related at largeunto her, the honourable affection of gerbino, with full tender of hisperson to her service, and that she onely was to dispose of him.both the message and the messenger, were most graciously welcome toher, and flaming in the selfe-same affection towards him: as atestimony thereof, one of the very choisest jewels which she bought ofhim, she sent by him to the prince gerbino, it being received by himwith such joy and contentment, as nothing in the world could be morepleasing to him. so that afterward, by the trusty carriage of thisjeweller, many letters and love-tokens passed betweene them, eachbeing as highly pleased with this poore, yet happy kind ofentercourse, as if they had seene and conversed with one another.
matters proceeding on in this manner, and continuing longer thentheir love-sick passions easily could permit, yet neither being ableto finde out any other meanes of helpe; it fortuned that the king ofthunis promised his daughter in marriage to the king of granada,whereat she grew exceedingly sorrowfull, perceiving, that not onelyshe should be sent further off, by a large distance of way from herfriend, but also be deprived utterly, of all hope ever to enjoy him.and if she could have devised any meanes, either by secret flight fromher father, or any way else to further her intention, she would haveadventured it for the princes sake. gerbino in like maner bearing ofthis purposed marriage, lived in a hell of torments, consultingoftentimes with his soule, how he might be possessed of her bypower, when she should be sent by sea to her husband, or privatestealing her away from her fathers court before: with these andinfinite other thoughts, was he incessantly afflicted, both day andnight.
by some unhappy accident or other, the king of thunis heard ofthis their secret love, as also of gerbinoes purposed policy tosurprize her, and how likely he was to effect it, in regard of hismanly valour, and store of stout friends to assist him. hereupon, whenthe time was come, that he would convey his daughter thence to hermarriage, and fearing to be prevented by gerbino: he sent to theking of sicilie, to let him understand his determination, craving safeconduct from him, without impeachment of gerbino, or any one else,untill such time as his intent was accomplished. king gulielmo beingaged, and never acquainted with the affectiotiate proceedings ofgerbino, nor any doubtfull reason to urge this security from him, in acase convenient to be granted: yeelded the sooner thereto rightwillingly, and as a signall of his honourable meaning, he sent him hisroyall glove, with a full confirmation for his safe conduct.
no sooner were these princely assurances received, but a goodly shipwas prepared in the port of carthagena, well furnished with allthinges thereto belonging, for the sending his daughter to the king ofgranada, waiting for nothing else but best favouring windes. the youngprincesse, who understood and saw all this great preparation; secretlysent a servant of hers to palermo, giving him especiall charge, on herbehalfe, to salute the prince gerbino, and to tell him that (withinfew dayes) she must be transported to granada. and now opportunitygave faire and free meanes, to let the world know, whether he were aman of that magnanimous spirit, or no, as generall opinion hadformerly conceived of him, and whether he affected her so firmely,as by many close messages he had assured her. he who had the charge ofthis embassie, effectually performed it, and then returned backe tothunis.
the prince gerbino, having heard this message from his divinemistresse, and knowing also, that the kin his grandfather, had pasthis safe conduct to the king of thunis, for peaceable passagethrough his seas: was at his wits end, in this urgent necessity,what might best bee done. notwithstanding, moved by the setledconstancy of his plighted love, and the speeches delivered to him bythe messenger from the princesse: to shew himselfe a man endued withcourage, he departed thence unto messina, where he made ready twospeedy gallies, and fitting them with men of valiant disposition,set away to sardignia, as making full account, that the ship whichcarried the princesse, must come along that coast. nor was hisexpectation therein deceived: for, within few dayes after, the ship(not over-swiftly winded) come sailing neere to the place where theyattended for her arrivall; whereof gerbino had no sooner gotten asight, but to animate the resolutes which were in his company, thus hespake.
gentlemen, if you be those men of valour, as heretofore you havebene reputed, i am perswaded, that there are some among you, whoeither formerly have, or now instantly do feele, the all-commandingpower of love, without which (as i thinke) there is not any mortallman, that can have any goodnesse- or vertue dwelling in him.wherefore, if ever you have bene amorously affected, or presently haveany apprehension thereof, you shall the more easily judge of what inow aime at. true it is, that i do love, and love hath guided me to becomforted, and manfully assisted by you, because in yonder ship, whichyou see commeth on so gently under saile (even as if she offered herselfe to be our prize) not onely is the jewell which i most esteeme,but also mighty and unvalewable treasure, to be wonne without anydifficult labour, or hazard of a dangerous fight, you being men ofsuch undauntable courage. in the honour of which victory, i covetnot any part or parcell, but onely a ladie, for whose sake i haveundertaken these armes, and freely give you all the rest containedin the ship. let us set on them, gentlemen, and my deerest friends;couragiously let us assaile the ship, you see how the wind favours us,and (questionlesse) in so good an action, fortune will not faile us.
gerbino needed not to have spoken so much, in perswading them toseize so rich a booty, because the men of messina were naturallyaddicted to spoile and rapine: and before the prince began hisoration, they had concluded to make the ship their purchase.wherefore, giving a lowde shout, according to their country manner,and commanding their trumpets to sound chearfully, they rowed on amaine with their oares, and (in meere despight) set upon the ship. butbefore the gallies could come neere her, they that had the chargeand managing of her, perceyving with what speede they made towardsthem, and no likely meanes of escaping from them, resolvedly theystood upon their best defence, for now it was no time to be slothfull.the prince being come neere to the ship, commanded that the patronesshould come to him, except they would adventure the fight. when thesarazines were thereof advertised, and understood also what hedemanded, they returned answer: that their motion and proceeding inthis manner, was both against law and plighted faith, which waspromised by the king of sicilie, for their safe passage through thesea by no meanes to be mollested or assailed. in testimony whereof,they shewed his glove, avouching moreover, that neither by force (orotherwise) they would yeelde, or deliver him any thing which theyhad aboorde their ship.
gerbino espying his gracious mistresse on the ships decke, and sheappearing to be farre more beautifull then fame had made relation ofher: being much more enflamed now, then formerly he had bin, replyedthus when they shewed the glove. we have (quoth he) no faulcon herenow, to be humbled at the sight of your glove: and therefore, if youwill not deliver the lady, prepare your selves for fight, for wemust have her whether you will or no. hereupon, they began to let flie(on both sides) their darts and arrowes, with stones sent in violentsort from their slings, thus continuing the fight a long while, tovery great harme on either side. at the length, gerbino perceiving,that small benefit would redound to him, if he did not undertakesome other kinde of course: he tooke a small pinnace, whichpurposely he brought with him from sardignia, and setting it on aflaming fire, conveyed it (by the gallies help) close to the ship. thesarazines much amazed thereat, and evidently perceiving, that eitherthey must yeeld or dye; brought their kings daughter to the prow ofthe ship, most greevously weeping and wringing her hands. then callinggerbino, to let him behold their resolution, there they slew hirbefore his face, and afterward, throwing her body into the sea, saide:take her, there we give her to thee, according to our bounden duty,and as thy perjury hath justly deserved.
this sight was not a little greevous to the prince gerbino, whomadded now with this their monstrous cruelty, and not caring whatbecame of his owne life, having lost her for whom he onely desiredto live: not dreading their darts, arrowes, slinged stones, or whatviolence els they could use against him; he leapt aboord their ship,in despight of all that durst resist him, behaving himselfe there likea hunger-starved lyon, when he enters among a heard of beasts, tearingtheir carkasses in pieces both with his teeth and pawes. such wasthe extreme fury of this poore prince, not sparing the life of anyone, that durst appeare in his presence; so that what with thebloody slaughter, and violence of the fires encreasing in the ship;the mariners got such wealth as possibly they could save, andsuffering the sea to swallow the rest, gerbino returned unto hisgallies againe, nothing proud of this so ill-gotten victory.
afterward, having recovered the princesse dead body out of thesea, and enbalmed it with sighes and teares: he returned backe intosicilie, where he caused it to be most honourably buried, in alittle island, named ustica, face to face confronting trapanum. theking of thunis hearing these disastrous newes, sent his ambassadors(habited in sad mourning) to the aged king of sicilie, complainingof his faith broken with him, and how the accident had falne out.age being sodainly incited to anger, and the king extreamly offendedat this injury, seeing no way whereby to deny him justice, it beingurged so instantly by the ambassadors: caused gerbino to beapprehended, and he himselfe (in regard that none of his lords andbarons would therein assist him, but laboured to divert him by theirearnest importunity) pronounced the sentence of death on the prince,and commanded to have him beheaded in his presence; affectingrather, to dye without an heire, then to be thought a king voyde ofjustice. so these two unfortunate lovers, never enjoyed the very leastbenefite of their long wished desires: ended both their lives inviolent manner.
the fourth day, the fift novell
wherein is plainly proved, that love cannot be rooted uppe,
by any humane power or providence; aspecially in such
soule, where it hath bene really apprehended
the three brethren to isabella, slew a gentleman that secretly lovedher. his ghost appeared to her in her sleepe, and shewed her in whatplace they had buried his body. she (in silent manner) brought awayhis head, aid putting it into a pot of earth, such as flowers, basile,or other sweete hearbes are usually set in; she watered it (a longwhile) with her teares. wherefore her brethren having intelligence;soone after she dyed, with meere conceite of sorrow.
the novell of madame eliza being finished, and some-what commendedby the king, in regard of the tragicall conclusion; philomena wasenjoyned to proceede next with her discourse. she being overcomewith much compassion, for the hard fortunes of noble gerbino, andhis beautifull princesse, after an extreame and vehement sighe, thusshe spake. my tale (worthy ladies) extendeth not to persons of so highbirth or quality, as they were of whom madame eliza gave you relation:yet (peradventure) it may prove to be no lesse pittifull. and now iremember my selfe, messina so lately spoken of, is the place wherethis accident also happened.
in messina there dwelt three young men, brethren, and merchants bytheir common profession, who becomming very rich by the death of theirfather, lived in very good fame and repute. their father was of sangemignano, and they had a sister named isabella, young, beautifull,and well conditioned; who upon some occasion, as yet remainedunmarried. a proper youth, being a gentleman borne in pisa, andnamed lorenzo, as a trusty factor or servant, had the managing ofthe brethrens businesse and affaires. this lorenzo being of comelypersonage, affable, and excellent in his behaviour, grew so graciousin the eyes of isabella, that she affoorded him many very respectivelookes, yea, kindnesses of no common quality. which lorenzo takingnotice of, and observing by degrees from time to time, gave over allother beauties in the city, which might allure any affection from him,and onely fixed his heart on her, so that their love grew to a mutuallembracing, both equally respecting one another, and entertainingkindnesses, as occasion gave leave.
long time continued this amorous league: of love, yet not socunningly concealed, but at the length, the secret meeting of lorenzo,and isabella, to ease their poore soul of loves oppressions, wasdiscovered by the eldest of the brethren, unknowne to them who werethus betrayed. he being a man of great discretion, although this sightwas highly displeasing to him: yet notwithstanding, he kept it tohimselfe till the next morning, labouring his braine what might bestbe done in so urgent a case. when day was come, he resorted to hisother brethren, and told them what he had seene in the time past,betweene their sister and lorenzo.
many deliberations passed on in this case; but after all, thusthey concluded together, to let it proceede on with patient that noscandall might ensue to them, or their sister, no evill acte being (asyet) committed. and seeming, as if they knew not of their love, hada wary eye still upon her secret walkes, awaiting for someconvenient time, when without their owne prejudice, or isabellaesknowledge, they might safely breake off this their stolne love,which was altogether against their liking. so, shewing no worsecountenance to lorenzo, then formerly they had done, but imploying andconversing with him in kinde manner; it fortuned, that riding (allthree) to recreate themselves out of the city, they tooke lorenzo intheir company, and when they were come to a solitarie place, such asbest suited with their vile purpose: they ran sodainly upon lorenzo,slew him, and afterward enterred his body, where hardly it could bediscovered by any one. then they returned backe to messina, and gaveit forth (as a credible report) that they had sent him abroad abouttheir affaires, as formerly they were wont to do: which every oneverily beleeved, because they knew no reason why they shouldconceite any otherwise.
isabella, living in expectation of his returne, and perceiving hisstay to her was so offensive long: made many demands to herbrethren, into what parts they had sent him, that his tarrying wasso quite from all wonted course. such was her importunate speechesto them, that they taking it very discontentedly, one of them returnedher this frowning answer. what is your meaning sister, by so manyquestionings after lorenzo? what urgent affaires have you with him,that makes you so impatient upon his absence? if hereafter you makeany more demands for him, we shall shape you such a reply, as willbe but little to your liking. at these harsh words, isabella fell intoabundance of teares, where-among she mingled many sighes andgroanes, such as were able to overthrow a farre stronger constitution:so that, being full of feare and dismay, yet no way distrusting herbrethrens cruell deede; she durst not question any more after him.
in the silence of darke night, as she lay afflicted in her bed,oftentimes would she call for lorenzo, entreating his speedy returningto her: and then againe, as if he had bene present with her, shecheckt and reproved him for his so long absence. one night amongst therest, she being growen almost hopelesse, of ever seeing him againe,having a long while wept and greevously lamented; her senses andfaculties utterly spent and tired, that she could not utter any morecomplaints, she fell into a trance or sleepe; and dreamed, that theghost of lorenzo appeared unto her, in torne and unbefitting garments,his lookes pale, meager, and staring: and (as she thought) thusspake to her. my deere love isabella, thou dost nothing but tormentthy selfe, with calling on me, accusing me for overlong tarryingfrom thee: i am come therefore to let thee know, that thou canst notenjoy my company any more, because the very same day when last thousawest me, thy brethren most bloodily murthered me. and acquaintingher with the place where they had buried his mangled body: heestrictly charged her, not to call him at any time afterward, and sovanished away.
the young damosell awaking, and giving some credite to her vision,sighed and wept exceedingly; and after she was risen in the morning,not daring to say any thing to her brethren, she resolutelydetermined, to go see the place formerly appointed her, onely tomake triall, if that which she seemed to see in her sleepe, shouldcarry any likelyhood of truth. having obtained favour of her brethren,to ride a dayes journey ney the city, in company of her trustynurse, who long time had attended on her in the house, and knew thesecret passages of her love: they rode directly to the designed place,which being covered with some store of dried leaves, and more deeplysunke then any other part of the ground therabout, they digged notfarre, but they found the body of murthered lorenzo, as yet verylittle corrupted or impaired, and then perceived the truth of hervision.
wisedome and government so much prevailed with her, as to instructher soule, that her teares spent there, were meerley fruitelesse andin vaine, neither did the time require any long tarrying there. gladlywould she have carried the whole body with her, secretly to bestowhonourable enterment on it, but it exceeded the compasse of herability. wherefore, in regard she could not have all, yet she wouldbe. possessed of a part, and having brought a keene razor with her, byhelpe of the nurse, she divided the head from the body, and wrapped itup in a napkin, which the nurse conveyed into her lap, and thenlaide the body in the ground againe. thus being undiscovered by any,they departed thence, and arrived at home in convenient time, wherebeing alone by themselves in the chamber: she washed the head over andover with her teares, and bestowed infinite kisses thereon.
not long after, the nurse having brought her a large earthen pot,such as we use to set basile, marjerom, flowers, or other sweethearbes in, and shrouding the head in a silken scarfe, put it into thepot, covering it with earth, and planting divers rootes of excellentbasile therein, which she never watered, but either with her teares,rose water, or water distilled from the flowers of oranges. this potshe used continually to sitte by, either in her chamber, or anywhere else: for she carried it alwaies with her, sighing and breathingfoorth sad complaints thereto, even as if they had beene uttered toher lorenzo, and day by day this was her continuall exercise, to theno meane admiration of her bretheren, and many other friends thatbeheld her.
so long she held on in this mourning manner, that, what by thecontinuall watering of the basile, and putrifaction of the head, soburied in the pot of earth; it grew very flourishing, and mostodorifferous to such as scented it, that as no other basile couldpossibly yeeld so sweete a savour. the neighbours noting thisbehaviour in her, observing the long continuance thereof, how much herbright beauty was defaced, and the eyes sunke into her head byincessant weeping, made many kinde and friendly motions, to understandthe reason of her so violent oppressions; but could not by anymeanes prevaile with her, or win any discovery by her nurse, sofaithfull was she in secrecie to her. her brethren also waxed wearieof this carriage in her; and having very often reproved her for it,without any other alteration in her: at length, they closely stoleaway the potte of basile from her, for which she made infinitewofull lamentations, earnestly entreating to have it restoredagaine, avouching that she could not live without it.
perceiving that she could not have the pot againe, she fell intoan extreame sicknesse, occasioned onely by her ceaselesse weeping: andnever urged she to have any thing, but the restoring of her basilepot. her brethren grew greatly amazed thereat, because she nevercalledfor ought else beside; and thereupon were very desirous to ransackethe pot to the very bottome. having emptied out all the earth, theyfound the scarfe of silke, wherein the head of lorenzo was wrapped;which was (as yet) not so much consumed, but by the lockes of haire,they knew it to be lorenzoes head, whereat they became confounded withamazement.
fearing least their offence might come to open publication, theyburied it very secretly; and, before any could take notice thereof,they departed from messina, and went to dwell in naples, isabellacrying and calling still for her pot of basile, being unable to giveover mourning, dyed within a few dayes after. thus have you heardthe hard fate of poore lorenzo and his isabella. within no longwhile after, when this accident came to be publikely knowne, anexcellent ditty was composed thereof beginning thus.
cruell and unkinde was the christian,
that robd me of my basiles blisse, etc.
the fourth day, the sixth novell
describing the admirable accidents of fortune; and the
mighty prevailing, power of love power of love
a beautifull young virgine, named andreana, became enamoured of ayoung gentleman called gabriello. in conference together, she declareda dreame of hers to him, and he another of his to her; whereupongabriello fell downe sodainly dead in her armes. she, and herchamber-maide were apprehended, by the officers belonging to theseigneury, as they were carrying gabriello, to lay him before his ownedoore. the potestate offering violence to the virgin, and sheresisting him vertuously: it came to the understanding of herfather, who approved the innocence of his daughter, and compassedher deliverance. but she afterward, being weary of all worldlyfelicities, entred into religion, and became a nun.
the novell which madam philomena had so graciously related, washighly pleasing unto the other ladies; because they had oftentimesheard the song, without knowing who made it or upon what occasion itwas composed. but when the king saw that the tale was ended: hecommanded pamphilus, that he should follow in his due course:whereupon he spake thus.
the dreame already recounted in the last novell, doth ministermatter to me, to make report of another tale, wherein mention ismade of two severall dreames; which divined as well what was to ensue,as the other did what had hapned before. and no sooner were theyfinished in the relation, by both the parties which had formerlydreampt them, but the effects of both as soddainly followed.
worthy ladies, i am sure it is not unknowne to you, that it is,and hath bene a generall passion, to all men and women living, tosee divers and sundry things while they are sleeping. and although (tothe sleeper) they seeme most certaine, so that when he awaketh, hejudgeth the trueth of some, the likelyhood of others, and somebeyond all possibility of truth: yet notwithstanding, many dreameshave bene observed to happen; and very strangely have come to passe.and this hath bene a grounded reason for some men, to give as greatcredit to such things as they see sleeping, as they do to othersusually waking. so that, according unto their dreames, and as theymake construction of them, that are sadly distasted, or merrilypleased, even as (by them) they either feare or hope. on the contrary,there are some, who will not credit any dreame whatsoever, untill theybe falne into the very same danger which formerly they saw, and mostevidently in their sleepe.
i meane not to commend either the one or other, because they donot alwayes fall out to be true; neither are they at all timeslyars. now, that they prove not all to be true, we can best testifieto our selves. and that they are not alwayes lyars, hath alreadysufficiently bene manifested, by the discourse of madame philomena,and as you shall perceive by mine owne, which next commeth in order tosalute you. wherefore, i am of this opinion, that in matters of goodlife, and performing honest actions; no dreame is to be fearedpresaging the contrary, neither are good works any way to be hindredby them. likewise, in matters of bad and wicked quality, althoughour dreames may appeare favourable to us, and our visions flatter uswith prosperous successe: yet let us give no credence unto the best,nor addict our minds to them of contrary nature. and now we wil.proceed to our novell.
in the citie of brescia, there lived somtime a gentleman, namedmesser negro da ponte cararo, who (among many other children) had adaughter called andreana, yong, and beautifull, but as yetunmarried. it fortuned, that shee fell in love with a neighbour, namedgabriello; a comely young gentleman, of affable complexion, andgraciously conditioned. which love was (with like kindenesse)welcommed and entertained by him; and by the furtherance of herchamber-maide, it was so cunningly carried, that in the gardenbelonging to andreanaes father, she had many meetings with hergabriello. and solemne vowes being mutually passed betweene them, thatnothing but death could alter their affection: by such ceremoniouswords as are used in marriage, they maried themselves secretlytogether, and continued their stolne chaste pleasures with equallcontentment to them both.
it came to passe, that andreana sleeping in her bed, dreamed, thatshee met with gabriello in the garden, where they both embracinglovingly together, she seemed to see a thing blacke and terrible,which sodainely issued forth of his body, but the shape therof shecould not comprehend. it rudely seized upon gabriello, and in despightof her utmost strength, with incredible force snatched him out ofher armes, and sinking with him into the earth, they never after didsee one another. whereupon, overcome with extremity of greefe andsorrow, presently she awaked, being then not a little joyfull, thatshe found no such matter as she feared, yet continued very doubtfullof her dreame. in regard whereof, gabriello being desirous to visiteher the night following: she laboured very diligently to hinder hiscomming to her; yet knowing his loyall affection toward her, andfearing least he should grow suspitious of some other matter, shewelcommed him into the garden, where gathering both white anddamaske roses (according to the nature of the season) at length,they sate downe by a very goodly fountaine, which stoode in themiddest of the garden.
after some small familiar discourse passing betweene them, gabriellodemanded of her, upon what occasion shee denyed his comming thitherthe night before, and by such a sodaine unexpected admonition?andreana told him, that it was in regard of a horrid dreame, wherewithher soule was perplexed the precedent night, and doubt what mightensue thereon. gabriello hearing this, began to smile, affirming toher, that it was an especial note of folly, to give any credit to idledreames: because (oftentimes) they are caused by excesse of feeding,and continually are observed to be meere lyes. for (quoth he) if i hadany superstitious beleefe of dreames, i should not then have comehither now: yet not so much as being dismayed by your dreame, butfor another of mine owne, which i am the more willing to acquaintyou withall.
me thought, i was in a goodly delightfull forrest, in the nobleexercise of sportfull hunting, and became there possessed of a younghinde, the verie loveliest and most pleasing beast that was everseene. it seemed to be as white as snow, and grew (in a short while)so familiar with me, that by no meanes it would forsake mee. i couldnot but accept this rare kindnes in the beast, and fearing least ishould loose it, i put a collar of gold about the necke thereof, andfastned it into a chaine of gold also, which then i held strongly inmy hand. the blind afterward couched downe by me, laying his headmildely in my lap; and on the sodaine, a black grey-hound bitch camerushing; on us (but whence, or how, i could not imagine) seeming halfehunger-starved, and very ugly to looke upon. at me she made her fullcarreere, without any power in me of resistance, and putting her mouthinto the left side of my bosom, griped it so mainly with her teeth,that (me thought) i felt my heart quite bitten through, and she tuggedon still, to take it wholly away from me; by which imagined paineand anguish i felt, instantly i awaked. laying then my hand upon myside, to know whether any such harme had befalne me, or no, andfinding none, i smiled at mine owne folly, in making such afrivolous and idle search. what can be said then in these or thelike cases?
divers times i have had as ill seeming dreames, yea, and much moreto be feared, yet never any thing hurtfull to me, followed thereon;and therefore i have alwayes made the lesse account of them.
the young maiden, who was still dismayed by her owne dreame,became much more afflicted in her minde, when shee had heard thisother reported by gabriello: but yet to give him no occasion ofdistast, she bare it out in the best manner she could devise to doe.and albeit they spent the time in much pleasing discourse,maintained with infinite sweete kisses on either side: yet was shestill suspitious, but knew not whereof; fixing her eyes oftentimesupon his face, and throwing strange lookes to all parts of the garden,to catch hold on any such blacke ugly sight, whereof he had formerlymade description to her. as thus she continued in these afflictingfeares, it fortuned, that gabriello sodainly breathing forth a veryvehement sighe, and throwing his armes fast about her, said: o helpeme dear love, or else i dye; and, in speaking the words, fell downeupon the ground. which the yong damosel perceiving, and drawing himinto her lappe, weeping saide: alas sweete friend, what paine doestthou feele?
gabriello answered not one word, but being in an exceeding sweate,without any ability of drawing breath, very soon after gave up theghost. how greevous this strange accident was to poore andreana, wholoved him as deerely as her owne life: you that have felt lovestormenting afflictions, can more easily conceive, then i relate.wringing her hands, and weeping incessantly, calling him, rubbinghis temples, and using all likely meanes to reduce life: she found allher labour to be spent in vaine, because he was starke dead indeed,and every part of his body as cold as ice: whereupon, she was insuch wofull extremity, that she knew not what to do, or say. all aboutthe garden she went weeping, in infinite feares and distraction insoule, calling for her chamber maid, the only secret friend to theirstolne meetings, and told her the occasion of this sodaine sorrow.after they had sighed and mourned awhile, over the dead body ofgabriello, andreana in this manner spake to her maide.
seeing fortune hath thus bereft me of my love, mine owne life mustneeds be hatefull to me: but before i offer any violence to myselfe, let us devise some convenient meanes, as may both preserve minehonour from any touch or scandall, and conceale the secret lovepassing betweene us: but yet in such honest sort, that this body(whose blessed soule hath too soone forsaken it) may be honourablyenterred. whereto her mayde thus answered: mistresse, never talke ofdoing any violence to your selfe, because by such a blacke and dismalldeed, as you have lost his kind company here in this life, so shallyou never more see him in the other world: for immediately you sinkedowne to hell, which foule place cannot be a receptacle for hisfaire soule, that was endued with so many singular vertues. wherefore,i hold it farre better for you, to comfort your selfe by all goodmeanes, and with the power of fervent praier, to fight against alldesperate intruding passions, as a truly vertuous minde ought todoe. now, as concerning his enterrement, the meanes is readilyprepared for you here in this garden, where never he hath bene seeneby any, or his resorting hither knowne, but onely to our selves. ifyou will not consent to have it so, let you and i convey his bodyhence, and leave it in such an apt place, where it may be found tomorrow morning: and being then carried to his owne house, hisfriends and kindred will give it honest buriall.
andreana, although her soule was extraordinarily sorrowfull, andteares flowed abundantly from her eyes; yet she listned attentively tohir maids counsell; allowing her first advice against desperation,to be truly good; but to the rest thus she replyed. god forbid(quoth she) that i should suffer so deere a loving friend, as hehath alwayes shewed himselfe to me; nay, which is much more, myhusband; by sacred and solemne vowes passed betweene us, to be putinto the ground basely, and like a dog, or else to be left in the openstreet. he hath had the sacrifice of my virgin teares, and if i canprevaile, he shall have some of his kindreds, as i have instantlydevised, what (in this hard case) is best to be done. forthwith shesent the maid to her chamber, for divers elles of white damaskelying in her chest, which when she had brought, they spread itabroad on the grasse, even in the manner of a winding sheete, andtherein wrapped the body of gabriello, with a faire wrought pillowunder his head, having first (with their teares) closed his mouthand eyes, and placed a chaplet of flowers on his head, covering thewhole shrowd over in the same manner; which being done, thus she spaketo her maid.
the doore of his owne house is not farre hence, and thither(betweene us two) he may be easily caried, even in this maner as wehave adorned him; where leaving him in his owne porch, we mayreturne back before it be day: and although it will be a sad sightto his friends, yet because he dyed in mine armes, and we being sowell discharged of the body, it will be a little comfort to me. whenshe had ended these words, which were not uttered without infiniteteares, the maid entreated her to make hast, because the night swiftlypassed on. at last, she remembred the ring on her finger, wherewithgabriello had solemnly espoused her, and opening the shroud againe,she put it on his finger, saying; my deere and loving husband, ifthy soule can see my teares, or any understanding do remaine in thybody, being thus untimely taken from me: receive the latest guift thougavest me, as a pledge of our solemne and spotlesse marriage. so,making up the shroud againe as it should be, and conveighing itclosely out of the garden, they went on along with it, towardes hisdwelling house.
as thus they passed along, it fortuned, that they were met and takenby the guard or watch belonging to the potestate, who had bin solate abroad, about very earnest and important businesse. andreana,desiring more the dead mans company, then theirs whom she had thus metwithall, boldly spake thus to them. i know who and what you are, andcan tell my selfe, that to offer flight will nothing availe me:wherfore, i am ready to go along with you before the seigneury, andthere will tell the truth concerning this accident. but let not anyman among you, be so bold as to lay hand on me, or to touch me,because i yeeld so obediently to you; neyther to take any thing fromthis body, except hee intend that i shall accuse him. in whichrespect, not any one daring to displease her, shee went with thedead bodle to the seigneurie, there to answere all objections.
when notice heereof was given to the potestate, he arose; and sheebeing brought foorth into the hall before him, he questioned with her,how and by what meanes this accident happened. beside, he sent fordivers physitians, to be informed by them, whether the gentlemanwere poysoned, or otherwise murthered? all of them affirmed thecontrarie, avouching rather, that some impostumation had engenderedneere his heart, which sodainly breaking, occasioned his as sodainedeath. the potestate hearing this, and perceiving that andreana waslittle or nothing at all faulty in the matter, her beauty and goodcarriage, kindled a vitlanous and lustful desire in him towards her,provoking him to the immodest motion, that upon granting hisrequest, he would release her. but when he saw, that all hisperswasions were to no purpose, hee sought to compasse his will byviolence; which like a vertuous and valiant virago, shee worthilywithstood, defending her honour nobly, and reprooving him with manyinjurious speeches, such as a lustfull letcher justlie deserved.
on the morrow morning, these newes being brought to her father,messer negro da ponte cararo, greeving thereat exceedingly, andaccompanied with many of his friends, he went to the pallace. beingthere arrived, and informed of the matter by the potestate: hedemaunded (in teares) of his daughter, how, and by what meanes sheewas brought thither? the potestate would needs accuse her first, ofoutrage and wrong offered to him by her, rather then to tarry heraccusing of him; yet, commending the yong mayden, and herconstancie, proceeded to say, that onely to prove her, he had madesuch a motion to her; but finding her so firme, his liking was nowso addicted to her, that- if her father were so pleased to forgetthe remembrance of her former secret husband, he willingly wouldaccept her in marriage.
while thus they continued talking, andreana comming before herfather, the teares trickling mainly downe her cheekes, and fallingat his feete, she began in this manner. deare father, i shall notneede to make an historicall relation, either of my youthfullboldnesse or misfortunes, because you have both seene and knowne them:rather most humbly, i crave your pardon, for another errour by meecommitted, in that, both without your leave and liking, i accepted theman as my troth-plighted husband, whom (above all other in the world imost intirely affected. if my offence heerein doe challenge theforfeite of my life, then (good father) i free you from any suchpardon; because my onely desire is to dye your daughter, and in yourgracious favour: with which words, in signe of her humility, shekissed his feete. messer negro da ponte, being a man well in yeeres,and of a gentle nature, observing what his daughter saide, could notrefraine from teares, and in his weeping, lovingly tooke her fromthe ground, speaking thus to her.
daughter, i could have wisht, that thou hadst taken such an husband,as (in my judgement) had bene best fitting for thee: yet if thoumadest election of one answerable to thine owne good liking, i have nojust reason to be offended therewith. my greatest cause of complaintis, thy too severe concealing it from me, and the small trust thoudidst repose in me, because thou hast lost him before i knew him.neverthelesse, seeing these occasions are thus come to passe, andaccidents already ended, cannot possibly be re-called, it is mywill, that as i would gladly have contented thee, by making him my sonin law if he had lived, so i wil expresse the like love to him nowhe is dead. and so turning himselfe to his kindred and friends,lovingly requested of them, that they would grace gabriello withmost honourable obsequies.
by this time, the kindred and friends to the dead man (uppon noiseof his death bruited abroad) were likewise come to the pallace, yea,most of the men and women dwelling in the cittie, the bodie ofgabriello being laide in the midst of the court, upon the whitedamaske shrowd given by andreana, with infinite roses and othersweet flowers lying theron: and such was the peoples love to him, thatnever was any mans death, more to be bemoaned and lamented. beingdelivered out of the court, it was carried to buriall, not like aburgesse or ordinary citizen, but with such pompe as beseemed a lordbaron, and on the shoulders of very noble gentlemen, with greathonor and reverence.
within some few dayes after, the potestate pursuing his formermotion of mariage, and the father mooving it to his daughter, shewould not by any meanes listen thereto. and he being desirous togive her contentment, delivered her and her chamber-maid into areligious abbey, very famous for devotion and sanctity, whereafterwards they ended their lives.
the fourth day, the seventh novell
whereby is given to understand, that love and death do use
their power equally alike, as well upon poore and meane
persons, as on them that are rich and noble
faire simonida affecting pasquino, and walking with him in apleasant garden, it fortuned, that pasquino rubbed his teeth with aleafe of sage, and immediately fell downe dead. simonida being broughtbefore the bench of justice, and charged with the death of pasquino,she rubbed her teeth likewise with one of the leaves of the same sage,as declaring what shee saw him do, and thereon she dyed also in thesame manner.
pamphilus having ended his tale, the king declaring an outwardshew of compassion, in regard of andreanaes disastrous fortune;fixed his eye on madam aemilia, and gave her such an apparant signe,as expressed his pleasure, for her next succeeding in discourse; whichbeing sufficient for her understanding, thus she began. faireassembly, the novell so lately delivered by pamphilus, maketh mewilling to report another to you, varying from it, in any kinde ofresemblance; onely this excepted: that as andreana lost her lover in agarden, even so did she of whom i am now to speake. and beingbrought before the seate of justice, according as andreana was,freed her selfe from the power of the law; yet neither by force, orher owne vertue, but by her sodaine and inopinate death. andalthough the nature of love is such (according as we have oftentimesheeretofore maintained) to make his abiding in the houses of thenoblest persons; yet men and women of poore and farre inferiourquality, do not alwayes sit out of his reach, though enclosed in theirmeanest cottages; declaring himselfe sometime as a powerfullcommaunder in those humble places, as he doth in the richest andmost imperious palaces. as will plainly appeare unto you, either inall, or a great part of my novell, whereto our citie pleadeth sometitle; though, by the diversity of our discourses, talking of somany severall accidents; we have wandred into many other parts ofthe world, to make all answerable to our owne liking.
it is not any long time since, when there lived in our city offlorence, a young and beautifull damosell, yet according to the natureof her condition; because she was the daughter of a poore father,and called by the name of simonida. now, albeit she was not suppliedby any better means, then to maintaine her selfe by her ownepainfull travell, and earne her bread before she could eate it, bycarding and spinning to such as employed her; yet was she not sobase or dejected a spirit, but had both courage and sufficient vertue,to understand the secret soliciting of love, and to distinguish theparts of well deserving both by private behaviour and outwardceremony. as naturall instinct was her first tutor thereto, sowanted she not a second maine and urging motion, a chip hewed out ofthe like timber, one no better in birth then her selfe, a proper youngspringall, named pasquino, whose generous behaviour, and gracefullactions (in bringing her dayly wooll to spin, by reason his master wasa clothier) prevailed upon her liking and affection.
nor was he negligent in the observation of her amorous regards,but the tinder tooke, and his soule flamed with the selfe same fire;making him as desirous of her loving acceptance, as possibly she couldbe of his: so that the commanding power of love, could not easily bedistinguished in which of them it had the greater predominance. forevery day as he brought her fresh supply of woolles, and found herseriously busied at her wheele: her soule would vent forth manydeepe sighes, and those sighes fetch floods of teares from her eyes,thorough the singular good opinion she had conceyved of him, andearnest desire to enjoy him. pasquino on the other side, as leysuregave him leave for the least conversing with her: his disease wasevery way answerable to hers, for teares stood in his eyes, sighesflew abroad, to ease the poore hearts afflicting oppressions, whichthough he was unable to conceale; yet would he seeme to clowd themcleanly, by entreating her that his masters worke might be neatlyperformed, and with such speed as time would permit her, intermixinginfinite praises of her artificiall spinning; and affirming withall,that the quilles of yearne received from her, were the choisest beautyof the whole peece; so that when other workewomen played, simonida wassure to want no employment.
hereupon, the one soliciting, and the other taking delight inbeing solicited; it came to passe, that often accesse bred thebolder courage, and over-much bashfulnesse became abandoned, yet noimmodesty passing betweene them: but affection grew the bettersetled in them both, by interchangeable vowes of constantperseverance, so that death onely, but no disaster else had power todivide them. their mutuall delight continuing on in this manner,with more forcible encreasing of their loves equall flame: itfortuned, that pasquino sitting by simonida, told her of a goodlygarden, whereto he was desirous to bring her, to the end, that theymight the more safely converse together, without the suspition ofenvious eyes. simonida gave answer of her wellliking the motion, andacquainting her father therewith, he gave her leave, on the sundayfollowing after dinner, to go fetch the pardon of s. gallo, andafterwards to visit the garden.
a modest yong maiden named lagina, following the same profession,and being an intimate familiar friend, simonida tooke along in hercompany, and came to the garden appointed by pasquino; where she foundhim readily expecting her comming, and another friend also with him,called puccino (albeit more usually tearmed strambo) a secretwell-willer to lagina, whose love became the more furthered by hisfriendly meeting. each lover delighting in his hearts chosenmistresse, caused them to walke alone by themselves, as thespaciousnesse of the garden gave them ample liberty: puccino withhis lagina in one part, and pasquino with his simonida in another. thewalke which they had made choise of, was by a long and goodly bed ofsage, turning and returning by the same bed their conference ministredoccasion, and as they pleased to recreate themselves, affecting ratherto continue still there, then in any part of the garden.
one while they would sit downe by the sage bed, and afterward riseto walke againe, as ease and wearinesse seemed to invite them. atlength, pasquino chanced to crop a leafe of the sage, wherewith heboth rubbed his teeth and gummes, and champing it betweene themalso, saying; that there was no better thing in the world to cleansethe teeth withall, after feeding. not long had he thus champed thesage in his teeth, returning to his former kinde of discoursing, buthis countenance began to change very pale, his sight failed, andspeech forsooke him; so that (in briefe) he fell downe dead. whichwhen simonida beheld, wringing her hands, she cryed out for helpe tostrambo and lagina, who immediately came running to her. theyfinding pasquino not onely to be dead, but his body swolne, andstrangely over-spred with foule black spots, both on his face,hands, and all parts else beside: strambo cried out, saying; ah wickedmaide, what hast thou poisoned him?
these words and their shrill out-cries also were heard by neighboursdwelling neere to the garden, who comming in sodainly uppon them,and seeing pasquino lying dead, and hugely swoln, strambo likewisecomplaining, and accusing simonida to have poysoned him; she making noanswer, but standing in a gastly amazement, all her senses meerelyconfounded, at such a strange and uncouth accident, in loosing himwhom she so dearely loved: knew not how to excuse-her selfe, andtherefore every one verily beleeved, that strambo had not unjustlyaccused her. poore wofull maide, thus was she instantly apprehended,and drowned in her teares, they led her along to the potes. tatespalace, where her accusation was justified by strambo, lagina, and twomen more; the one named atticciato, and the other malagevole, fellowesand companions with pasquino, who came into the garden also upon theout-cry.
the judge, without any delay at all, gave eare to the busines, andexamined the case very strictly: but could by no meanes comprehend,that any malice should appeare in her towards him, nor that she wasguiltie of the mans death. wherefore, in the presence of simonida,he desired to see the dead body, and the place where he fell downedead, because there he intended to have her relate, how she saw theaccident to happen, that her owne speeches might the sooner condemneher, whereas the case yet remained doubtfull, and farre beyond hiscomprehension. so, without any further publication, and to avoid thefollowing of the turbulent multitude, they departed from the benchof justice, and came to the place, where pasquinoes body lay swolnelike a tunne. demanding there questions, concerning his behaviour,when they walked there in conference together, and, not a littleadmiring the manner of his death, while he stood advisedly consideringthereon.
she going to the bed of sage, reporting the whole precedent history,even from the originall to the ending: the better to make the caseunderstood, without the least colour of ill carriage towardespasquino; according as she had seene him do, even so o she pluckeanother leafe of the sage, rubbing her teeth therewith, and champingit as he formerly did. strambo, and the other intimate friends ofpasquino, having noted in what manner she used the sage, and thisappearing as her utmost refuge, either to acquit or condemne her: inpresence of the judge they smiled thereat, mocking and deridingwhatsoever she saide, or did, and desiring (the more earnestly) thesentence of death against her, that her body might be consumed withfire, as a just punishment for her abhominable transgression.
poore simonida, sighing and sorrowing for her deere loves losse, and(perhappes) not meanly terrified, with the strict infliction oftorment so severely urged and followed by strambo and the reststanding dumb still, without answering so much as one word; by tastingof the same sage, fell downe dead by the bed, even by the likeaccident pasquino formerly did, to the admirable astonishment of allthere present.
oh poore infortunate lovers, whose starres were so inauspicious toyou, as to finish both your mortall lives, and fervent love, inlesse limitation then a dayes space. how to censure of your deaths,and happines to ensue thereon, by an accident so strange andinevitable: it is not within the compasse of my power, but to hope thebest, and so i leave you. but yet concerning simonida her selfe, inthe common opinion of us that remaine living: her true vertue andinnocency (though fortune was otherwise most cruell to her) wouldnot suffer her to sinke under the testimony of strambo, lagina,atticciato, and malagevole, being but carders of wool, or perhaps ofmeaner condition; a happier course was ordained for her, to passeclearely from their infamous imputation, and follow her pasquino, inthe very same manner of death, and with such a speedy expedition.
the judge standing amazed, and all there present in his company,were silent for a long while together: but, uppon betterrecollection of his spirits, thus he spake. this inconvenience whichthus hath hapned, and confounded our senses with no common admiration;in mine opinion concerneth the bed of sage, avouching it either tobe venomous, or dangerously infected, which (neverthelesse) isseldom found in sage. but to the end, that it may not be offensiveto any more hereafter, i will have it wholly digd up by the rootes,and then to be burnt in the open market place.
hereupon, the gardiner was presently sent for, and before thejudge would depart thence, he saw the bed of sage digged up by theroots, and found the true occasion, whereby these two poore loverslost their lives. for, just in the middest of the bed, and at themaine roote, which directed all the sage in growth; lay an huge mightytoad, even weltring (as it were) in a hole full of poyson; by meaneswhereof, in conjecture of the judge, and all the rest, the whole bedof sage became envenomed, occasioning every leafe thereof to be deadlyin taste. none being so hardy, as to approach neere the toade, theymade a pile of wood directly over it, and setting it on a flamingfire, threw all the sage thereinto, and so they were consumedtogether. so ended all further suite in law, concerning the deathsof pasquino and simonida: whose bodies being carried to the churchof saint paul, by their sad and sorrowfull accusers, strambo,lagina, atticciato and malagevole, were buried together in onegoodly monument, for a future memory of their hard fortune.
the fourth day, the eight novell
wherein is againe declared, the great indiscretion and folly of
them, that think to constraine love, according to their will,
after it is constantly setled before: with other
instructions, concerning the unspeakeable power of love
jeronimo affecting a yong maiden, named silvestra, was constrained(by the earnest importunity of his mother) to take a journey to paris.at his return home from thence againe, he found his love silvestramarried. by secret meanes, he got entrance into her house, and dyedupon the bed lying by her. afterward, his body being carried tochurch, to receive buriall, she likewise died there instantly upon hiscoarse.
madam aemilia no sooner concluded her novell, but madam neiphila (bythe kings command) began to speake in this manner. it seemeth to me(gracious ladies) that there are some such people to be found, whoimagine themselves to know more, then all other else in the worldbeside, and yet indeede do know nothing at all: presuming (thoroughthis arrogant opinion of theirs) to imploy and oppose their senselesseunderstanding, against infallible grounded reason, yea, and to attemptcourses, not only contrary to the counsell and judgement of men, butalso to crosse the nature of divine ordination. out of which saucy andambitious presumption, many mighty harmes have already hadbeginning, and more are like to ensue uppon such boldnesse, because itis the ground of all evils.
now, in regard that among all other naturall things, no one is lessesubject to take counsell, or can be wrought to contrariety, then love,whose nature is such, as rather to run upon his owne rash consumption,then to be ruled by admonitions of the very wisest: my memory hathinspired it selfe, with matter incident to this purpose, effectuallyto approve, what i have already said. for i am now to speake of awoman who would appeare to have more wit, then either she hadindeed, or appertained to her by any title. the matter also, whereinshe would needs shew her studious judgement and capacity, was ofmuch more consequence then she could deserve to meddle withall. yetsuch was the issue of her fond presuming; that (in one instant) sheexpelled both love, and the soule of her owne sonne out of his body,where (doubtlesse) it was planted by divine favour and appointment.
in our owne city (according to true and ancient testimony) theredwelt sometime a very worthy and wealthy merchant, named leonardosighiero, who by his wife had one onely sonne, called jeronimo; andwithin a short while after his birth, leonardo being very sicke, andhaving setled all his affaires in good order; departed out of thiswretched life to a better. the tutors and governours of the childe,thought it fittest to let him live with his mother, where he had hiswhole education, though schooled among many other worthy neighbourschildren, according as in most cities they use to do. yong jeronimogrowing on in yeares, and frequenting dayly the company of hisschoole-fellowes and others: he would often sport (as the rest did)with the neighbors children, and much pretty pastime they foundtogether.
in the harmlesse recreations of youth, graver judgements haveoften observed, that some especiall matter received then suchoriginall, as greater effect hath followed thereon. and many times,parents and kindred have bene the occasion (although perhaps beyondtheir expectation) of very strange and extraordinary accidents, bynames of familiarity passing betweene boyes and girles, as king andqueene, sweet heart and sweet heart, friend and friend, husband andwife, and divers other such like kind tearmes, prooving afterwardsto be true indeed. it fell out so with our yong jeronimo; for, among anumber of pretty damosels, daughters to men of especiall respect,and others of farre inferiour quality: a taylors daughter, excellingthe rest in favour and feature (albeit her father was but poore)jeronimo most delighted to sport withall; and no other titles passedbetweene them, even in the hearing of their parents and friends, butwife and husband: such was the beginning of their yong affection,presaging (no doubt) effectually to follow.
nor grew this familiarity (as yet) any way distasted, till bytheir daily conversing together, and enterchange of infinite prettyspeeches, jeronimo felt a strange alteration in his soule, with suchenforcing and powerfull afflictions; as he was never well but in hercompany, nor she enjoyed any rest if jeronimo were absent. at thelength, this being noted by his mother, she began to rebuke him, yeamany times gave him both threatnings and blowes, which proving to nopurpose, not hindering his accesse to her; she complained to histutors, and like one that in regard of her riches, thought to plant anorange upon a blacke thorne, spake as followeth.
this sonne of mine jeronimo, being as yet but foureteene years ofage, is so deeply enamoured of a yong girle, named silvestra, daughterunto a poore tailor, our neere dwelling neighbour: that if we do notsend him out of her company, one day (perhaps) he may make her hiswife, and yet without any knowledge of ours, which questionlesse wouldbe my death. otherwise, he may pine and consume himselfe away, if hesee us procure her marriage to some other. wherefore, hold it good,that to avoid so great an inconvenience, we should send jeronimosome far distance hence, to remaine where some of our factors areemployed: because, when he shall be out of her sight, and theiroften meetings utterly disappointed; his affection to her will thesooner cease, by frustrating his hope for ever enjoying her, and so weshall have the better meanes, to match him with one of greaterquality. the tutors did like well of her advice, not doubting but itwould take answerable effect: and therefore, calling jeronimo into aprivate parlor, one of them began in this manner.
jeronimo, you are now growne to an indifferent stature, and (almost)able to take government of your selfe. it cannot then seeme any wayinconvenient, to acquaint you with your deceased fathers affaires, andby what good courses he came to such wealth. you are his onely sonneand heire, to whom he hath bequeathed his rich possessions (yourmothers moity evermore remembred) and travaile would now seeme fittingfor you, as well to gaine experience in trafficke and merchandize,as also to let you see the worlds occurrences. your mother therefore(and we have thought it expedient) that you should journey fromhence to paris, there to continue for some such fitting time, as maygrant you full and free opportunity, to survey what stocke of wealthis there employed for you, and to make you understand, how yourfactors are furtherous to your affaires. beside, this is the way tomake you a man of more solid apprehension, and perfect instructionin civill courses of life; rather then by continuing here to seenone but lords, barons, and gentlemen, whereof we have too great anumber. when you are sufficiently qualified there, and have learnedwhat belongeth to a worthy marchant, such as was leonardo sighieroyour famous father; you may returne home againe at your owne pleasure.
the youth gave them attentive hearing, and (in few words) returnedthem answer: that he would not give way to any such travaile,because he knew how to dispose of himselfe in florence, as well asin any other place he should be sent too. which when his tutors heard,they reproved him with many severe speeches: and seeing they could winno other answer from him, they made returne thereof to his mother. shestorming extreamly thereat, yet not so much for denying the journey toparis, as in regard of his violent affection to the maide; gave himvery bitter and harsh language. all which availing nothing, shebegan to speake in a more milde and gentle straine, entreating himwith flattering and affable words, to be governed in this case byhis tutors good advice. and so farre (in the end) she prevailed withhim, that he yeelded to live at paris for the space of a yeare, butfurther time he would not grant, and so all was ended.
jeronimo being gone to remaine at paris, his love daily increasingmore and more, by reason of his absence from silvestra, under faireand friendly promises, of this moneth, and the next moneth, sendingfor him home; there they detained him two whole yeares together.whereuppon, his love was growne to stich an extremity, that he neitherwould, or could abide any longer there, but home he returned, beforehe was expected. his love silvestra, by the cunning compacting ofhis mother and tutors, he found married to a tent-makers sonne;whereat he vexed and greeved beyond all measure. neverthelesse, seeingthe case was now no way to be holpen; he strove to beare it with somuch patience, as so great a wrong, and his hearts tormentinggreefe, would give leave to doe.
having found out the place where she dwelt, he began (as it is thecustome of yong lovers) to use divers daily walkes by her doore: asthinking in his minde, that her remembrance of him was constantlycontinued, as his was most intirely fixed on her. but the case wasvery strangely altred, because she was now growne no more mindfullof him, then if she had never seene him before. or if she did anyway remember him, it appeared to be so little, that manifest signesdeclared the contrary. which jeronimo very quickely perceived,albeit not without many melancholly perturbations. notwithstanding, helaboured by all possible meanes, to recover her former kindnesseagaine: but finding all his paines frivolously employed; he resolvedto dye, and yet to compasse some speech with her before.
by meanes of a neere dwelling neighbour (that was his very deare andintimate friend) he came acquainted with every part of the house,and prevailed so far, that one evening, when she and her husbandsupt at a neighbours house; he compassed accesse into the same bedchamber, where silvestra used most to lodge. finding the curtainesready drawne, he hid himselfe behinde them on the further side ofthe bed, and so tarried there untill silvestra and her husband werereturned home, and laide downe in bed to take their rest. the husbandssences were soone overcome with sleepe, by reason of his painefulltoyling all the day, and bodies that are exercised with much labour,are the more desirous to have ease.
she staying up last, to put out the light, and hearing her husbandsleepe so soundly, that his snoring gave good evidence thereof:layed her selfe downe the more respectively, as being very loath anyway to disease him, but sweetly to let him enjoy his rest.
silvestra lay on the same side of the bed, where jeronimo had hidhimselfe behinde the curtaines; who stepping softly to her in thedarke, and laying his hand gently on her brest, saide: deare love,forbeare a little while to sleepe, for heere is thy loyall friendjeronimo. the yong woman starting with amazement, would have criedout, but that he entreated her to the contrary; protesting, that hecame for no ill intent to her, but onely to take his latest leave ofher. alas jeronimo (quoth she) those idle dayes are past and gone,when it was no way unseemly for our youth, to entertaine equality ofthose desires, which then well agreed with our young blood. sincewhen, you have lived in forraine countries, which appeared to me toalter your former disposition: for, in the space of two wholeyeares, either you grew forgetfull of me (as change of ayre, maychange affection) or (at the best) made such account of me, as i neverheard the least salutation from you. now you know me to be a marriedwife, in regard whereof, my thoughts have embraced that chaste andhonourable resolution, not to minde any man but my husband; andtherefore, as you are come hither without my love or license, so inlike manner i do desire you to be gone. let this priviledge of myhusbandes sound sleeping, be no colour to your longer continuing here,or encourage you to finde any further favour at mine hand: for if minehusband should awake, beside the danger that thereon may follow toyou, i cannot but loose the sweet happinesse of peacefull life,which hitherto we have both mutually embraced.
the yong man, hearing these wordes, and remembring what lovingkindnesse he had formerly found, what secret love letters he hadsent from paris, with other private intelligences and tokens, whichnever came to her receite and knowledge, so cunningly his mother andtutors had carried the matter: immediately felt his heart-strings tobreake, and lying downe upon the beds side by her, uttered these hisvery last words. silvestra farewell, thou hast kilde the kindest heartthat ever loved a woman: and speaking no more, gave up the ghost.she hearing these words delivered with an entire sighe, anddeepe-fetcht groane, did not imagine the strange consequence followingthereon; yet was mooved to much compassion, in regard of her formeraffection to him. silent she lay an indifferent while, as being unableto returne him any answer, and looking when he would be gone,according as before she had earnestly entreated him. but when sheperceyved him to lye so still, as neither word or motion came fromhim, she saide: kinde jeronimo, why doest thou not depart and get theegone? so putting forth her hand, it hapned to light upon his face,which she felt to be as cold as yce: whereat marvailing not alittle, as also at his continued silence, she jogged him, and felt hishands in like manner, which were stiffely extended forth, and allhis body cold, as not having any life remaining in him, whichgreatly amazing her, and confounding her with sorrow beyond allmeasure, she was in such perplexity, that she could not devise what todo or say.
in the end, she resolved to try how her husband would take it,that so strange an accident should thus happen in his house, andputting the case as if it did not concerne them, but any other ofthe neighbours; awaking him first, demaunded of him what was best tobe done, if a man should steale into a neighbours house, unknowne tohim, or any of his family; and in his bed chamber to be found dead. hepresently replyed (as not thinking the case concerned himselfe)that, the onely helpe in such an unexpected extremity, was to take thedead body, and convey it to his owne house, if he had any; wherebyno scandall or reproach would follow to them, in whose house he had sounfortunately dyed. hereupon she immediately arose, and lighting acandle, shewed him the dead body of jeronimo, with protestation ofevery particular, both of her innocency, either of knowledge of hiscomming thither, or any other blame that could concerne her. whichhe both constantly knowing and beleeving, made no more ceremony, butputting on his garments, tooke the dead body upon his shoulders, andcarried it to the mothers doore, where he left it, and afterwardreturned to his owne house againe.
when day light was come, and the dead body found lying in the porch,it moved very much greefe and amazement, considering, he had bin seenethe day before, in perfect health to outward appearance. nor needewe to urge any question of his mothers sorrow upon this strangeaccident, who, causing his body to be carefully searched, withoutany blow, bruise, wound, or hurt uppon it, the physitians could notgive any other opinion, but that some inward conceyte of greefe hadcaused his death, as it did indeed, and no way otherwise. to thecheefe church was the dead body carried, to be generally seene ofall the people, his mother and friends weeping heavily by it, asmany more did the like beside, because he was beloved of every one. inwhich time of universall mourning, the honest man (in whose house hedyed) spake thus to his wife: disguise thy selfe in some decentmanner, and go to the church, where (as i heare) they have laide thebody of jeronimo. crowde in amongest the women, as i will do thelike amongst the men, to heare what opinion passeth of his death,and whether we shall be scandalized thereby, or no.
silvestra, who was now become full of pitty too late, quickelycondiscended, as desiring to see him dead, whom sometime she dearlyaffected in life. and being come to the church, it is a matter to beadmired, if advisedly we consider on the powerfull working of love;for the heart of this woman, which the prosperous fortune ofjeronimo could not pierce, now in his wofull death split in sunder;and the ancient sparks of love so long concealed in the embers,brake foorth into a furious flame; and being violently surprizedwith extraordinary compassion, no sooner did she come neere to thedead body, where many stood weeping round about it; but strangelyshrieking out aloud, she fell downe upon it: and even as extreamity ofgreefe finished his life, so did it hers in the same manner. for shemoved neither hand nor foot, because her vitall powers had quiteforsaken her. the women labouring to comfort her by all best meanesthey could devise; did not take any knowledge of her, by reason of herdisguised garments: but finding her dead indeed, and knowing heralso to be silvestra, being overcome with unspeakable compassion,and danted with no meane admiration, they stood strangely gazingeach upon other.
wonderfull crowds of people were then in the church; and thisaccident being now noysed among the men, at length it came to herhusbands understanding, whose greefe was so great, as it exceededall capacity of expression. afterward he declared what had hapned inhis house the precedent night, according as his wife had truly relatedto him, with all the speeches, which passed between silvestra andjeronimo; by which discourse, they generally conceived, the certaineoccasion of both their sodaine deaths, which moved them to greatcompassion. then taking the yong womans body, and ordering it as acoarse ought to be: they layed it on the same biere by the yong man,and when they had sufficiently sorrowed for their disastrousfortune, they gave them honourable buriall both in. one grave. so,this poore couple, whom love (in life) could not joyne together, deathdid unite in an inseparable conjunction.
the fourth day, the ninth novell
whereby appeareth, what ill successe attendeth on them,
that love contrary to reason: in offering injurie both to
friendship and marriage together
messer guiglielmo of rossiglione having slaine messer guiglielmoguardastagno, whom hee imagined to love his wife, gave her his heartto eate. which she knowing afterward, threw her selfe out of an highwindow to the ground; and being dead, was then buried with her friend.
when the novell of madam neiphila was ended, which occasioned muchcompassion in the whole assembly; the king who wold not infringe thepriviledge granted to dioneus, no more remaining to speake but theytwo, began thus. i call to minde (gentle ladies) a novell, which(seeing we are so farre entred into the lamentable accidents ofsuccesselesse love), will urge you unto as much commisseration, asthat so lately reported to you. and so much the rather, because theperson of whom we are to speake, were of respective quality; whichapproveth the accident to be more cruell, then those whereof we haveformerly discoursed.
according as the people of provence do report, there dweltsometime in that jurisdiction, two noble knights, each wellpossessed of castles and followers; the one being named messerguiglielmo de rossiglione, and the other messer guiglielmoguardastagno. now, in regard that they were both valiant gentlemen,and singularly expert in actions of armes; they loved together themore mutually, and held it as a kinde of custome to be seene in alltiltes and tournaments, or any other exercises of armes, goingcommonly alike in their wearing garments. and although their castlesstood about five miles distant each from other, yet were they daylyconversant together, as very loving and intimate friends. the one ofthem, i meane messer guiglielmo de rossilione, had to wife a verygallant beautifull lady, of whom messer guardastagno (forgetting thelawes of respect and loyall friendship) became overfondly enamoured,expressing the same by such outward meanes, that the lady her selfetooke knowledge thereof, and not with any dislike, as it seemed, butrather lovingly entertained; yet she grew not so forgetfull of herhonour and estimation, as the other did of faith to his friend.
with such indiscretion was this idle love carried, that whether itsorted to effect, or no, i know not: but the husband perceived somesuch maner of behaviour, as he could not easily digest, nor thought itfitting to endure. whereuppon, the league of friendly amity so longcontinued, began to faile in very strange fashion, and becameconverted into deadly hatred: which yet he very cunningly concealed,bearing an outward shew of constant friendship still, but (in hisheart) he had vowed the death of guardastagno. nothing wanted, butby what meanes it might best be effected, which fell out to be in thismanner. a publicke joust or tourney, was proclaimed by sound oftrumpet throughout all france, wherewith immediately, messerguiglielmo rossiglione acquainted messer guardastagno, entreatinghim that they might further conferre theron together, and for thatpurpose to come and visit him, if he intended to have any hand inthe businesse. guardastagno being exceeding glad of this accident,which gave him liberty to see his mistresse, sent answer backe bythe messenger, that on the morrow at night, he would come and sup withrossiglione; who upon this reply, projected to himselfe in whatmaner to kill him.
on the morrow, after dinner, arming himselfe, and two more of hisservants with him, such as he had solemnly sworne to secrecy, hemounted on horsebacke, and rode on about a mile from his ownecastle, where he lay closely ambushed in a wood, through whichguardastagno must needs passe. after he had stayed there some twohoures space and more, he espyed him come riding with two of hisattendants, all of them being unarmed, as no way distrusting anysuch intended treason. so soone as he was come to the place, wherehe had resolved to do the deed; hee rushed forth of the ambush, andhaving a sharpe lance readily charged in his rest, ran mainly athim, saying: false villaine, thou art dead. guardastagno, havingnothing wherewith to defend himselfe, nor his servants able to givehim any succour; being pierced quite through the body with thelance, downe he fell dead to the ground, and his men (fearing the likemisfortune to befall them) gallopped mainely backe againe to theirlords castle, not knowing them who had thus murthered their master, byreason of their armed disguises, which in those martiall times wereusually worne.
messer guiglielmo rossiglione, alighting from his horse, andhaving a keene knife ready drawne in his hand; opened therewith thebrest of dead guardastagno, and taking foorth his heart with hisowne hands, wrapped it in the bandelote belonging to his lance,commanding one of his men to the charge thereof, and never to disclosethe deed. so, mounting on horse-backe againe, and darke nightdrawing on apace, he returned home to his castle. the lady, who hadheard before of guardastagnoes intent, to suppe there that night,and (perhaps) being earnestly desirous to see him; marvailing at hisso long tarrying, saide to her husband: beleeve me sir (quoth she)me thinkes it is somewhat strange, that messer guiglielmo guardastagnodelayes his comming so long, he never used to do so till now. ireceived tidings from him wife (saide he) that he cannot be heretill to morrow. whereat the lady appearing to be displeased, concealedit to herselfe, and used no more words.
rossiglione leaving his lady, went into the kitchin, where callingfor the cooke, he delivered him the heart, saying: take this heartof a wilde boare, which it was my good happe to kill this day, anddresse it in the daintiest manner thou canst devise to do; which beingso done, when i am set at the table, send it to me in a silver dish,with sauce beseeming so dainty a morsell. the cooke tooke the heart,beleeving it to be no otherwise, then as his lord had saide: and usinghis utmost skill in dressing it, did divide it into artificiallsmall slices, and made it most pleasing to be tasted. when supper timewas come, rossiglione sate downe at the table with his lady: but hehad little or no appetite at all to eate, the wicked deed which he haddone so perplexed his soule, and made him to sit very strangelymusing. at length, the cooke brought in the dainty dish, which hehimselfe setting before his wife, began to finde fault with his ownelacke of stomacke, yet provoked her with many faire speeches, totast the cooks cunning in so rare a dish.
the lady having a good appetite indeede, when she had first tastedit, fed afterward so heartily thereon, that she left very little, ornone at all remaining. when he perceived that all was eaten, he saidunto her: tell me madame, how you do like this delicate kinde ofmeate? in good faith sir (quoth she) in all my life i was never betterpleased. now trust mee madame, answered the knight, i do verilybeleeve you, nor do i greatly wonder thereat, if you like that dead,which you loved so dearly being alive. when she heard these words, along while she sate silert, but afterward saide. i pray you tell mesir; what meate was this which you have made me to eate? muse nolonger (saide he) for therein i will quickly resolve thee. thou hasteaten the heart of messer guiglielmo guardastagno, whose love was sodeare and precious to thee, thou false, perfidious, and disloyalllady: i pluckt it out of his vile body with mine owne hands, andmade my cooke to dresse it for thy diet.
poore lady, how strangely was her soule afflicted, hearing theseharsh and unpleasing speeches? teares flowed aboundantly from herfaire eies, and like tempestuous windes embowelled in the earth, sodid vehement sighes breake mainly from her heart, and after atedious time of silence, she spake in this manner. my lord andhusband, you have done a most disloyall and damnable deede,misguided by your owne wicked jealous opinion, and not by any justcause given you, to murther so worthy and noble a gentleman. i protestunto you upon my soule, which i wish to be confounded in eternallperdition, if ever i were unchaste to your bed, or allowed him anyother favour, but what might well become so honourable a friend. andseeing my body hath bene made the receptacle for so precious a kindeof foode, as the heart of so valiant and courteous a knight, such aswas the noble guardastagno; never shall any other foode hereafter,have entertainment there, or my selfe live the wife to so bloody ahusband.
so starting up from the table, and stepping unto a great gazingwindow, the casement whereof standing wide open behinde her: violentlyshee leaped out thereat, which beeing an huge height in distancefrom the ground, the fall did not onely kill her, but also shiveredher body into many peeces. which rossiglione perceiving, hee stoodelike a body without a soule, confounded with the killing of so deare afriend, losse of a chaste and honourable wife, and all through hisowne overcredulous conceit.
upon further conference with his private thoughts, and remorsefullacknowledgement of his heinous offence, which repentance (too late)gave him eyes now to see, though rashnesse before would not permit himto consider; these two extreamities inlarged his dulled understanding.first, he grew fearfull of the friends and followers to murtheredguardastagno, as also the whole country of provence, in regard ofthe peoples generall love unto him; which being two maine andimportant motives, both to the detestation of so horrid an act, andimmediate severe revenge to succeede thereon: he made such provisionas best he could, and as so sodaine a warning would give leave, he redaway secretly in the night season.
these unpleasing newes were soone spread abroad the next morning,not only of the unfortunate accidents, but also of rossiglions flight;in regard whereof, the dead bodyes being found, and broughttogether, as well by the people belonging to guardastagno, as themthat attended on the lady: they were layed in the chappell ofrossigliones castle; where, after so much lamentation for so great amisfortune to befall them, they were honourably enterred in onefaire tombe, with excellent verses engraven thereon, expressing boththeir noble degree, and by what unhappy meanes, they chanced to haveburiall in that very place.
the fourth day, the tenth novell
wherein is declared, that sometime by adventurous accident,
rather then any reasonable comprehension, a man may escape out of
manifold perilles, but especially in occurrences of love.
a physitians wife laide a lover of her maides (supposing him to bedead) in a chest, by reason that he had drunke water, which usuallywas given to procure a sleepy entrancing. two lombard usurers,stealing the chest, in hope of a rich booty, carryed it into theirowne house, where afterward the man awaking, was apprehended for atheefe. the chamber-maide to the physitians wife, going before thebench of justice, accuseth her selfe for putting the imagined deadbody into the chest, by which meanes he escapeth hanging. and thetheeves which stole away the chest, were condemned to pay a greatsumme of money.
after that the king had concluded his novell, there remained nonenow but dioneus to tell the last: which himselfe confessing, and theking commaunding him to proceede, hee beganne in this manner. somany miseries of unfortunate love, as all of you have already related,hath not onely swolne your eyes with weeping, but also made sickeour hearts with sighing: yea (gracious ladies) i my selfe finde myspirits not meanly afflicted thereby. wherefore the whole day hathbene very irkesome to me, and i am not a little glad, that it is soneere ending. now, for the better shutting it up altogether, i wouldbe very loath to make an addition, of any more such sad andmournfull matter, good for nothing but onely to feede melanchollyhumor, and from which (i hope) my faire starres will defend me.tragicall discourse, thou art no fit companion for me, i willtherefore report a novell which may minister a more joviall kinde ofargument, unto whose tales that must be told to morrow, and with theexpiration of our present kings reigne, to rid us of allheart-greeving hereafter.
know then (most gracious assembly) that it is not many yeeres since,when there lived in salerne, a very famous physitian, named signieurmazzeo della montagna, who being already well entred into yeeres,would (neverthelesse) marrie with a beautifull young mayden of thecity, bestowing rich garments, gaudie attyres, ringes, and jewelles onher, such as few women else could any way equall, because hee lovedher most deerely. yet being an aged man, and never remembring, howvaine and idle a thing it is, for age to make such an unfittingelection, injurious to both; and therefore endangering that domestickeagreement, which ought to be the sole and maine comfort of marriage:it maketh me therefore to misdoubt, that as in our former tale ofsigniour ricciardo de cinzica, some dayes of the calender did hereseeme as distastefull, as those that occasioned the other womansdiscontentment. in such unequall choyses, parents commonly are moreblamewoorthy, then any imputation, to bee layde on the young women,who gladdely would enjoy such as in heart they have elected: butthat their parents, looking through the glasse of greedie lucre, doeoverthrow both their owne hopes, and the faire fortunes of theirchildren together.
yet to speake uprightly of this young married wife, she declared herselfe to be of a wise and chearfull spirit, not discoraged with herunequalitie of marriage: but bearing all with a contented browe, forfeare of urging the very least mislike in her husband. and he, onthe other side, when occasions did not call him to visite hispatients, or to be present at the colledge among his fellow-doctours,would alwayes bee chearing and comforting his wife, as one that couldhardly affoord to be out of her company. there is one especiallfatall misfortune, which commonly awaiteth on olde mens marriages;when freezing december will match with flourishing may, and greenedesires appeare in age, beyond all possibility of performance. norare there wanting good store of wanton gallants, who hating to seebeauty in this manner betrayed, and to the embraces of a loathed bed,will make their folly seene in publike appearance, and by their dailyproffers of amorous services (seeming compassionate of the womansdisaster) are usually the cause of jealous suspitions, and veryheinous houshold discontentments.
among divers other, that faine would be nibling at this bayte ofbeautie, there was one, named ruggiero de jeroly, of honourableparentage, but yet of such a beboshed and disordered life, asneither kindred or friends, were willing to take any knowledge of him,but utterly gave him over to his dissolute courses: so that,throughout all salerne, his conditions caused his generall contempt,and he accounted no better but even as a theeving and lewde company.the doctours wife, had a chamber-maide attending on her; who,notwithstanding all the ugly deformities in ruggiero, regarding morehis person then his imperfections (because he was a compleate andwell-featured youth) bestowed her affection most entirely on him,and oftentimes did supplie his wants, with her owne best meanes.
ruggiero having this benefite of the maides kinde love to him,made it an hopefull mounting ladder, whereby to derive some goodliking from the mistresse, presuming rather on his outward comelyparts, then any other honest qualitie that might commend him. themistresse knowing what choise her maide had made, and unable by anyperswasions to remoove her, tooke knowledge of ruggieroes privateresorting to her house, and in meere love to her maide (who had verymany especiall deservings in her) oftentimes she would (in kindemanner) rebuke him, and advise him to a more settled course of life;which counsell, that it might take the better effect; she gracedwith liberall gifts: one while with golde, others with silver, andoften with garments, for his comelier accesse thither; which bounty,he (like a lewde mistaker) interpreted as assurances of heraffection to him, and that he was more gracefull in her eye, thenany man else could be.
in the continuance of these proceedings, it came to passe, thatmaster doctor mazzeo (being not onely a most expert physitian, butlikewise as skilfull in chirurgerie beside) had a patient in cure, whoby great misfortune, had one of his legges broken all in pieces; whichsome weaker judgement having formerly dealt withall, the bones andsinewes were become so fowly putrified, as he tolde the partiesfriends, that the legge must be quite cut off, or else the patientmust needes dye: yet he intended so to order the matter, that theperill should proceede no further, to prejudice any other part ofthe body. the case beeing thus resolved on with the pacient and hisfriends, the day and time was appointed when the deede should be done:and the doctor conceiving, that except the patient were sleepilyentranced, he could not by any meanes endure the paine, but mustneedes hinder what he meant to do: by distillation he made such anartificiall water, as (after the patient hath received it) it willprocure a kinde of a dead sleepe, and endure so long a space, asnecessity requireth the use there of, in full performance of theworke.
after he had made this sleepy water, he put it into a glasse,wherewith it was filled (almost) up to the brimme; and till the timecame when he should use it, hee set it in his owne chamber-window,never acquainting any one, to what purpose he had provided thewater, nor what was his reason of setting it there; when it drewtowards the evening, and he was returned home from his pacients, amessenger brought him letters from malfy, concerning a greatconflict happening there betweene two noble families, wherein diverswere very dangerously wounded on either side, and without his speedyrepairing thither, it would prove to the losse of many lives.hereupon, the cure of the mans leg must needs be prolonged, untillhe was returned backe againe, in regard that many of the woundedpersons were his worthy friends, and liberall bounty was there to beexpected, which made him presently go aboord a small barke, andforthwith set away towards malfy.
this absence of master doctor mazzeo, gave opportunity toadventurous ruggiero, to visite his house (he being gone) in hope toget more crownes, and curtisie from the mistresse, under formallcolour of courting the maide. and being closely admitted into thehouse, when divers neighbours were in conference with her mistresse,and held her with much pleasing discourse, as required longer timethen was expected: the maide, had no other roome to concealeruggiero in, but onely the bed chamber of her master, where shelockt him in; because none of the houshold people should descry him,and stayed attending on her mistris, till all the guests tooke theirleave, and were gone. ruggiero thus remayning alone in the chamber,for the space of three long houres and more was visited neither bymaide nor mistris, but awaited when he should be set at liberty.
now, whether feeding on salt meates before his coming thither, orcustomary use of drinking, which maketh men unable any long while toabstaine as being never satisfied with excesse; which of these twoextreames they were, i know not: but drinke needs he must. and, havingno other meanes for quenching his thirst, espied the glasse of waterstanding in the window, and thinking it to be some soveraigne kinde ofwater, reserved by the doctor for his owne drinking, to make him lustyin his old yeeres, he tooke the glasse; and finding the water pleasingto his pallate, dranke it off every drop; then sitting downe on acoffer by the beds side, soone after he fell into a sound sleepe,according to the powerfull working of the water.
no sooner were all the neighbours gone, and the maide at libertyfrom her mistresse, but unlocking the doore, into the chamber shewent; and finding ruggiero sitting fast asleepe, she began to hunchand punche him, entreating him (softly) to awake: but all was to nopurpose, for he neither moved, or answered one word; whereat herpatience being somewhat provoked, she punched him more rudely, andangerly saide: awake for shame thou drowsie dullard, and if thou be sodesirous of sleeping, get thee home to thine owne lodging, becausethou art not allowed to sleepe here. ruggiero being thus rudelypunched, fell from off the coffer flat on the ground, appearing noother in all respects, then as if he were a dead body. whereat themaide being fearfully amazed, plucking him by the nose and youngbeard, and what else she could devise to do, yet all her labourproving still in vaine: she was almost beside her wits, stamping andraving all about the roome, as if sense and reason had forsaken her;so violent was her extreame distraction.
upon the hearing of this noise, her mistris came sodainely intothe chamber, where being affrighted at so strange an accident, andsuspecting that ruggiero was dead indeed: she pinched him strongly,and burnt his finger with a candle, yet all was as fruitelesse asbefore. then sitting downe, she began to consider advisedly with herselfe, how much her honour and reputation would be endangeredhereby, both with her husband, and in vulgar opinion when thisshould come to publike notice. for (quoth she to her maide) it isnot thy fond love to this unruly fellow that can sway the censure ofthe monster multitude, in beleeving his accesse hither onely tothee: but my good name, and honest repute, as yet untoucht with thevery least taxation, will be rackt on the tenter of infamousjudgement, and (though never so cleare) branded with generallcondemnation. it is wisedome therefore, that we should make no noisebut (in silence) consider with our selves, how to cleare the houseof this dead body, by some such helpfull and witty device, as whenit shall be found in the morning, his being here may passe withoutsuspition, and the worlds rash opinion no way touch us.
weeping and lamenting is now laid aside, and all hope in them of hislives restoring: onely to rid his body but of the house, that nowrequires their care and cunning: whereupon the maide thus began.mistresse (quoth she) this evening, although it was very late, atour next neighbours doore (who you know is a joyner by his trade) isaw a great chest stand; and, as it seemeth, for a publike sale,because two or three nights together, it hath not bene thence removed:and if the owner have not lockt it, all invention else cannotfurnish us with the like helpe. for therein will we lay his body,whereon i will bestow two or three wounds with my knife, and leavinghim so, our house can be no more suspected concerning his beinghere, then any other in the streete beside; nay rather farre lesse, inregard of your husbands credite and authority. moreover, hereof i amcertaine, that he being of such bad and disordered qualities: itwill the more likely be imagined, that he was slaine by some of hisown loose companions, being with them about some pilfering busines,and afterward hid his body in the chest, it standing so fitly forthe purpose, and darke night also favouring the deed.
the maids counsell past under the seale of allowance, only hermistris thought it not convenient, that (having affected hirn sodeerely) she should mangle his body with any wounds; but rather to letit be gathered by more likely-hood, that villaines had strangledhim, and then conveyed his body into the chest. away she sends themaide, to see whether the chest stood there still, or no; as indeedeit did, and unlockt, whereof they were not a little joyfull. by thehelpe of her mistresse, the maide tooke ruggiero upon her shoulders,and bringing him to the doore, with dilligent respect that no onecould discover them; in the chest they laide him, and so there lefthim, closing downe the lidde according as they found it.
in the same streete, and not farre from the joyner, dwelt two yongmen who were lombards, living upon the interest of their moneyes,coveting to get much, and to spend little. they having observedwhere the chest stood, and wanting a necessary mooveable tohoushold, yet loath to lay out money for buying it: complottedtogether this very night, to steale it thence, and carry it home totheir house, as accordingly they did; finding it somewhat heavy, andtherefore imagining, that matter of woorth was contained therein. inthe chamber where their wives lay, they left it; and so without anyfurther search till the next morning, they laid them downe to restlikewise.
ruggiero, who had now slept a long while, the drinke being digested,and the vertue thereof fully consummated; began to awake before day.and although his naturall sleepe was broken, and his senses hadrecovered their former power, yet notwithstanding, there remained suchan astonishment in his braine, as not onely did afflict him all theday following, but also divers dayes and nights afterward. havinghis eyes wide open, and yet not discerning any thing, he stretchedforth his armes every where about him, and finding himselfe to beenclosed in the chest, he grew more broad awake, and said to himselfe.what is this? where am i? do i wake or steepe? full well i remember,that not long since i was in my sweet-hearts chamber, and now (methinkes) i am mewed up in a chest. what should i thinke hereof? ismaster doctor returned home, or hath some other inconvenience happned,whereby finding me a sleepe, she was enforced to hide me thus?surely it is so, and otherwise it cannot be: wherefore, it is best forme to lye still, and listen when i can heare any talking in thechamber.
continuing thus a longer while then otherwise he would have done,because his lying in the bare chest was somewhat uneasie andpainfull to him; turning divers times on the one side, and then asoften againe on the other, coveting still for ease, yet could notfinde any: at length, he thrust his backe so strongly against thechests side, that (it standing on an un-even ground) it began tototter, and after fell downe. in which fall, it made so loud anoise, as the women (lying in the beds standing by) awaked, and wereso overcome with feare, that they had not the power to speake oneword. ruggiero also being affrighted with the chests fall, andperceiving how by that meanes it was become open, he thought itbetter, least some other sinister fortune should befall him, to beat open liberty, then inclosed up so strictly. and because he knew notwhere he was, as also hoping to meete with his mistresse; he wentall about groping in the darke, to find either some staires ordoore, whereby to get forth.
when the women (being then awake) heard his trampling, as also hisjustling against the doores and windowes; they demaunded, who wasthere? ruggiero, not knowing their voyces, made them no answer;wherefore they called to their husbands, who lay very soundly sleepingby them, by reason of their so late walking abroad, and thereforeheard not this noise in the house. this made the women much moretimorous, and therefore rising out of their beddes, they opened thecasement towards the streete, crying out aloude, theeves, theeves. theneighbours arose upon this outcry, running up and downe from placeto place, some engirting the house, and others entering into it: bymeans of which troublesome noise, the two lombards awaked, and seizingthere upon poore ruggiero (who was well-neere affrighted out of hiswittes, at so strange an accident, and his owne ignorance, how hehappened thither, and how to escape from them) he stood gazing on themwithout any answer.
by this time, the sergeants and other officers of the city,ordinarily attending on the magistrate, being raised by the tumultof this uproare, were come into the house, and had poore ruggierocommitted unto their charge: who bringing him before the governor, wasforthwith called in question, and known to be of a most wicked life, ashame to all his friends and kindred. he could say little forhimselfe, never denying his taking in the house, and thereforedesiring to finish all his fortunes together, desperately confessed,that he came with a fellonious intent to rob them, and the governorgave him sentence to be hanged.
soone were the newes spread throughout salerne; that ruggiero wasapprehended, about robbing the house of the two usuring lombardes:which when mistresse doctor and her chamber-maide heard, they wereconfounded with most strange admiration, and scarsely credited whatthey themselves had done the night before, but rather imagined allmatters past, to be no more than meerely a dreame, concerningruggieroes dying in the house, and their putting him into the chest,so that by no likely or possible meanes, he could be the man in thisperillous extreamitie.
in a short while after, master doctor mazzeo was returned frommalfy, to proceede in his cure of the poore mans legge; and callingfor his glasse of water, which he left standing in his owne chamberwindow, it was found quite empty, and not a drop in it: whereat heraged so extreamly, as never had the like impatience bene noted inhim. his wife, and her maide, who had another kinde of businesse intheir braine, about a dead man so strangely come to life againe,knew not well what to say; but at the last, his wife thus replyedsomewhat angerly. sir (quoth she) what a coyle is here about apaltry glasse of water, which perhaps hath bene spilt, yet neytherof us faulty therein? is there no more such water to be had in theworld? alas deere wife (saide he) you might repute it to be a commonkinde of water, but indeed it was not so; for i did purposely compoundit, onely to procure a dead seeming sleepe: and so related the wholematter at large, of the pacients legge, and his waters losse.
when she had heard these words of her husband, presently sheconceived, that the water was drunke off by ruggiero, which had sosleepily entranced his sences, as they verily thought him to bedead, wherefore she saide. beleeve me sir, you never acquainted uswith any such matter, which would have procured more carefullrespect of it: but seeing it is gone, your skill extendeth to makemore, for now there is no other remedy. while thus master doctor andhis wife were conferring together, the maide went speedily into thecity, to understand truly, whither the condemned man was ruggiero, andwhat would now become of him. being returned home againe, and alonewith her mistresse in the chamber, thus she spake. now trust memistresse, not one in the city speaketh well of ruggiero, who is theman condemned to dye; and, for ought i can perceive, he hath neitherkinsman nor friend that will doe any thing for him; but he is leftwith the provost, and must be executed to morrow morning. moreovermistresse, by such instructions as i have received, i can well-neereinforme you, by what meanes he came to the two lombards house, ifall be true that i have heard.
you know the joyner before whose doore the chest stoode, whereinwe did put ruggiero; there is now a contention betweene him andanother man, to whom (it seemeth) the chest doth belong; in regardwhereof, they are ready to quarrell extreamly each with other. for theone owing the chest, and trusting the joyner to sell it for him, wouldhave him to pay him for the chest. the joyner denieth any salethereof, avouching, that the last night it was stolne from hisdoore. which the other man contrarying, maintaineth that he soldethe chest to the two lombard usurers, as himselfe is able toaffirme, because he found it in the house, when he (being present atthe apprehension of ruggiero) sawe it there in the same house.hereupon, the joyner gave him the lye, because he never sold it to anyman; but if it were there, they had robd him of it, as he would makeit manifest to their faces. then falling into clamerous speechesthey went together to the lombardes house, even as i returned home.wherefore mistresse, as you may easily perceive, ruggiero was(questionlesse) carried thither in the chest, and so there found;but how he revived againe, i cannot comprehend.
the mistresse understanding now apparantly, the full effect of thewhole businesse, and in what manner it had bene carried, revealed tothe maide her husbands speeches, concerning the glasse of sleepiewater, which was the onely engine of all this trouble, clearlyacquitting ruggiero of the robbery, howsoever (in desparate fury,and to make an end of a life so contemptible) he had wrongfullyaccused himselfe. and notwithstanding this his hard fortune, whichhath made him much more infamous then before, in all the dissolutebehaviour of his life: yet it could not quaile her affection towardshim; but being loath he should dye for some other mans offence, andhoping his future reformation; she fell on her knees before hermistresse, and (drowned in her teares) most earnestly entreated her,to advise her with some such happy course, as might be the safety ofpoore ruggieroes life. mistresse doctor, affecting her maidedearely, and plainely perceiving, that no disastrous fortunewhatsoever, could alter her love to condemned ruggiero; hoping thebest hereafter, as the maide her selfe did, and willing to save liferather then suffer it to be lost without just cause, she directedher in such discreet manner, as you will better conceive by thesuccesse.
according as she was instructed by her mistresse, she fell at thefeete of master doctor, desiring him to pardon a great error,whereby she had over-much offended him. as how? said master doctor. inthis manner (quoth the maide) and thus proceeded. you are not ignorantsir, what a lewde liver ruggiero de jeroly is, and notwithstanding allhis imperfections, how deerely i love him, as he protesteth the liketo me, and thus hath our love continued a yeere, and more. you beinggone to malfy, and your absence granting me apt opportunity, forconference with so kinde a friend; i made the bolder, and gave himentrance into your house, yea even into mine owne chamber, yet freefrom any abuse, neither did he (bad though he be) offer any. thirstyhe was before his comming thither, either by salt meat, or distempereddiet, and i being unable to fetch him wine or water, by reason mymistresse sat in the hall, seriously talking with her sisters;remembred, that i saw a violl of water standing in your chamberwindow, which he drinking quite off, i set it empty in the placeagaine. i have heard your discontentment for the said water, andconfesse my fault to you therein: but who liveth so justly, withoutoffending at one time or other? and i am heartily sory for mytransgression; yet not so much for the water, as the hard fortune thathath followed thereon; because thereby ruggiero is in danger to losehis life, and all my hopes are utterly lost. let me entreat youtherefore (gentle master) first to pardon me, and then to grant mepermission, to succour my poore condemned friend, by all the bestmeanes i can devise.
when the doctor had heard all her discourse, angry though he were,yet thus he answered with a smile. much better had it bin, if thyfollies punishment had falne on thy selfe, that it might have paidethee with deserved repentance, upon thy mistresses finding theesleeping. but go and get his deliverance if thou canst, with thiscaution, that if ever hereafter he be seene in my house, the perillthereof shall light on thy selfe. receiving this answer, for her firstentrance into the attempt, and as her mistresse had advised her, inall hast she went to the prison, where she prevailed so well withthe jaylor, that hee granted her private conference with ruggiero. shehaving instructed him what he should say to the provost, if he had anypurpose to escape with life; went thither before him to the provost,who admitting her into his presence, and knowing that shee wasmaster doctors maid, a man especially respected of all the city, hewas the more willing to heare her message, he imagining that sheewas sent by her master.
sir (quoth shee) you have apprehended ruggiero de jeroly, as atheefe, and judgement of death is (as i heare) pronounced against him:but hee is wrongfully accused, and is clearly innocent of such aheinous detection. so entring into the history, she declared everycircumstance, from the originall to the end: relating truly, thatbeing her lover, shee brought him into her masters house, where hedranke the compounded sleepy water, and reputed for dead, she laidehim in the chest. afterward, she rehearsed the speeches betweene thejoyner, and him that laide claime to the chest, giving him tounderstand thereby, how ruggiero was taken in the lombards house.
the provost presently gathering, that the truth in this case waseasie to be knowne; sent first for master doctor mazzeo, to know,whether he compounded any such water, or no: which he affirmed to betrue, and upon what occasion he prepared it. then the joyner, theowner of the chest, and the two lombards, being severally questionedwithall: it appeared evidently, that the lombards did steale the chestin the night season, and carried it home to their owne house. in theend, ruggiero being brought from the prison, and demanded, where hewas lodged the night before, made answer, that he knew not where.onely he well remembred, that bearing affection to the chamber-maideof master doctor mazzeo della montagna, she brought him into achamber, where a violl of water stoode in the window, and he beingextreamly thirsty, dranke it off all. but what became of him afterward(till being awake, he found himselfe enclosed in a chest, and in thehouse of the two lombards) he could not say any thing.
when the provost had heard all their answers, which he caused themto repeate over divers times, in regard they were very pleasing tohim: he cleared ruggiero from the crime imposed on him, andcondemned the lombards in three hundred ducates, to be given toruggiero in way of an amends, and to enable his marriage with thedoctors mayde, whose constancie was much commended, and wrought such amiracle on penitent ruggiero; that after his marriage, which wasgraced with great and honourable pompe, he regained the intimatelove of all his kindred, and lived in most noble condition, even as ifhe had never bene any disordered man.
if the former novels had made all the ladies sad and sighe, thislast of dioneus as much delighted them, as restoring them to theirformer jocond humor, and banishing tragicall discourse for ever. theking perceiving that the sun was neere setting, and his governmentas neere ending, with many kinde and courteous speeches, excusedhimselfe to the ladies, for being the motive of such an argument, asexpressed the infelicity of poore lovers. and having finished hisexcuse, up he rose, taking the crown of lawrell from off his ownehead, the ladies awaiting on whose head he pleased next to set it,which proved to be the gracious lady fiammetta, and thus he spake.here i place this crowne on her head, that knoweth better then anyother, how to comfort this faire assembly to morrow, for the sorrowwhich they have this day endured.
madame fiammetta, whose lockes of haire were curled, long, andlike golden wiers, hanging somewhat downe over her white anddelicate shoulders, her visage round, wherein the damaske rose andlilly contended for priority, the eyes in her head, resembling thoseof the faulcon messenger, and a dainty mouth; her lippes lookinglike two little rubyes, with a commendable smile thus she replyed.
philostratus, gladly i do accept your gift; and to the end that yemay the better remember your selfe, concerning what you have donehitherto: i will and command, that generall preparation be madeagainst to morrow, for faire and happy fortunes hapning to lovers,after former cruell and unkinde accidents. which proposition wasvery pleasing to them all.
then calling for the master of the houshold, and taking order withhim, what was most needfull to be done; she gave leave unto thewhole company (who were all risen) to go recreate themselves untillsupper time. some of them walked about the garden, the beautywhereof banished the least thought of wearinesse. others walked by theriver to the mill, which was not farre off, and the rest fell toexercises, fitting their owne fancies, untill they heard the summonsfor supper. hard by the goodly fountaine (according to their wontedmanner) they supped altogether, and were served to their no meanecontentment: but being risen from the table, they fell to theirdelight of singing and dancing. while philomena led the dance, thequeene spake in this manner.
philostratus, i intend not to varie from those courses heretoforeobserved by my predecessors, but even as they have already done, so itis my authority, to command a song. and because i am well assured,that you are not unfurnished of songs answerable to the quality of thepassed novels: my desire is, in regard we would not be troubledhereafter, with any more discourses of unfortunate love, that youshall sing a song agreeing with your owne disposition. philostratusmade answer, that hee was ready to accomplish her command, and withoutall further ceremony, thus he began.
the song
chorus. my teares do plainly prove,
how justly that poore heart hath cause to greeve
which (under trust) findes treason in his love.
when first i saw her, that now makes me sigh,
distrust did never enter in my thoughts.
so many vertues clearly shin'd in her,
that i esteem'd all martyrdome was light
which love could lay on me. nor did i greeve,
although i found my liberty was lost.
but now mine error i do plainly see:
not without sorrow, thus betray'd to bee.
my teares do, etc.
for, being left by basest treachery
of her in whom i most reposed trust:
i then could see apparant flatterie
in all the fairest shewes that she did make.
but when i strove to get forth of the snare,
i found my selfe the further plunged in.
for i beheld another in my place,
and i cast off, with manifest disgrace.
my, etc.
then felt my heart such hels of heavy woes,
not utterable. i curst the day and houre
when first i saw her lovely countenance,
enricht with beautie, farre beyond all other:
which set my soule on fire, enflamde each part,
making a martyrdome of my poore hart.
my faith and hope being basely thus betrayde;
i durst not moove, to speake i was affrayde.
my teares do, etc.
thou canst (thou powerfull god of love) perceive,
my ceasselesse sorrow, voyde of any comfort:
i make my moane to thee, and do not fable,
desiring, that to end my misery,
death may come speedily, and with his dart
with one fierce stroke, quite passing through my heart:
to cut off future fell contending strife,
an happy end be made of love and life.
my teares do, etc.
no other meanes of comfort doth remaine,
to ease me of such sharpe afflictions,
but onely death. grant then that i may die,
to finish greefe and life in one blest houre.
for, being bereft of any future joyes,
come, take me quickly from so false a friend.
yet in my death, let thy great power approve,
that i died true, and constant in my love.
my teares do, etc.
happy shall i account this sighing song,
if some (beside my selfe) do learne to sing it,
and so consider of my miseries,
as may incite them to lament my wrongs.
and to be warned by my wretched fate;
least (like my selfe) themselves do sigh too late.
learne lovers, learne, what tis to be unjust,
and be betrayed, where you repose best trust.
the words contained in this song, did manifestly declare, whattorturing afflictions poore philostratus felt, and more (perhaps)had beene perceived by the lookes of the lady whom he spake of,being then present in the dance; if the sodaine ensuing darknessehad not hid the crimson blush, which mounted up into her face. but thesong being ended, and divers other beside, lasting till the houre ofrest drew on; by command of the queene, they all repaired to theirchambers.
the induction to the fift day
whereon, all the discourses do passe under the government of the
most noble lady fiammetta: concerning such persons, as have bene
successefull in their love, after many hard and
perillous misfortunes
now began the sunne to dart foorth his golden beames, when madamfiammetta (incited by the sweete singing birdes, which since thebreake of day, sat merrily chanting on the trees) arose from herbed: as all the other ladies likewise did, and the three younggentlemen descending downe into the fields, where they walked in agentle pace on the greene grasse, untill the sunne were risen a littlehigher. on many pleasant matters they conferred together, as theywalked in severall companies, till at the length the queene, findingthe heate to enlarge it selfe strongly, returned backe to thecastle; where when they were all arrived, she commanded, that afterthis mornings walking, their stomackes should be refreshed withwholsom wines, as also divers sorts of banquetting stuffe.afterward, they all repaired into the garden, not departing thence,the houre of dinner was come: at which time, the master of thehoushold, having prepared every thing in decent readinesse, after asolemne song was sung, by order from the queene, they were seated:
when they had dined, to their own liking and contentment, they began(in continuation of their former order) to exercise divers dances, andafterward voyces to their instruments, and many pretty madrigals androundelayes. upon the finishing of these delights, the queene gavethem leave to take their rest, when such as were so minded, went tosleep, others solaced themselves in the garden. but after midday wasoverpast, they met (according to their wonted manner) and as thequeene had commanded, at the faire fountaine; where she being placedin her seate royall, and casting her eye upon pamphilus, she bad himbegin the dayes discourses, of happy successe in love, afterdisastrous and troublesome accidents; who yeelding thereto with humblereverence, thus began.
many novels (gracious ladies) do offer themselves to my memory,wherewith to beginne so pleasant a day, as it is her highnessedesire that this should be: among which plenty, i esteeme one aboveall the rest, because you may comprehend thereby, not onely thefortunate conclusion, wherewith we intend to begin our day; butalso, how mighty the forces of love are, deserving to be bothadmired and reverenced. albeit there are many, who scarsely knowingwhat they say, do condemne them with infinite grosse imputations:which i purpose to disprove, and (i hope) to your no little pleasing.
the fift day, the first novell
whereby that love (oftentimes) maketh a man both wise and
valiant
chynon, by falling in love, became wise, and by force of armes,winning his faire lady iphigenia on the seas, was afterward imprisonedat rhodes. being delivered by anyone named lysimachus, with him herecovered his iphigenia againe, and faire cassandra, even in themiddest of their marriage. they fled with them into candye, whereafter they had married them, they were called home to their ownedwelling.
according to the ancient annales of the cypriots, there sometimelived in cyprus, a noble gentleman, who was commonly calledaristippus, and exceeded all other of the country in the goods offortune. divers children he had, but (amongst the rest) a sonne, inwhose birth he was more infortunate then any of the rest; andcontinually greeved, in regard, that having all the compleateperfections of beauty, good forme, and manly parts, surpassing allother youths of his age or stature, yet hee wanted the reallornament of the soule, reason and judgement; being (indeed a meereideot or foole,) and no better hope to be expected of him. his truename, according as he received it by baptisme, was galesus, butbecause neyther by the laborious paines of his tutors indulgence,and faire endevour of his parents, or ingenuity of any other, he couldnot be brought to civility of life, understanding of letters, orcommon carriage of a reasonable creature: by his grosse and deformedkinde of speech, his qualities also savouring rather of brutishbreeding, then any way derived from manly education; as an epithite ofscorne and derision, generally, they gave him the name of chynon,which in their native countrey language, and divers other beside,signifieth a very sot or foole, and so was he termed by every one.
this lost kinde of life in him, was no meane burthen of greefeunto his noble father, and all hope being already spent, of any futurehappy recovery, he gave command (because he would not alwaies havesuch a sorrow in his sight) that he should live at a farme of his ownein a country village, among his peazants and plough-swaines. which wasnot any way distastefull to chynon, but well agreed with his ownenaturall disposition; for their rurall qualities, and grosse behaviourpleased him beyond the cities civility. chynon living thus at hisfathers countrey village, exercising nothing else but ruralldemeanour, such as then delighted him above all other: it chanced upona day about the houre of noone, as hee was walking over the fields,with a long staffe on his necke, which commonly he used to carry; heentred in to a small thicket, reputed the goodliest in all thosequarters, and by reason it was then the month of may, the trees hadtheir leaves fairely shot forth.
when he had walked through the thicket, it came to passe, that (evenas good fortune guided him) hee came into a faire meadow, on everyside engirt with and in one corner thereof stoode a goodlyfountaine, whose current was both coole and cleare. hard by it, uponthe greene grasse, he espied a very beautifull young damosell, seemingto be fast asleepe, attired in such fine loose garments, as hidde verylittle of her white body: onely from the girdle downward, she ware akirtle made close unto her, of interwoven delicate silke; and at herfeete lay two other damosels sleeping, and a servant in the samemanner. no sooner had chynon fixed his eye upon her, but he stoodleaning upon his staffe; and viewed her very advisedly, withoutspeaking word, and in no meane admiration, as if he had never seenethe forme of a woman before. he began then to feele in his harshrurall understanding (whereinto never till now, either by painfullinstruction, or all other good meanes used to him, any honest civilityhad power of impression) a strange kinde of humour to awake, whichinformed his grosse and dull spirite, that this damosell was thevery fairest, which ever any living man beheld.
then he began to distinguish her parts, commending the tresses ofher haire, which he imagined to be of gold; her forehead, nose, mouth,necke, armes, but (above all) her brests, appearing (as yet) but onelyto shew themselves, like two little mountaines. so that, of afielden clownish lout, he would needs now become a judge of beauty,coveting earnestly in his soule, to see her eyes, which were veiledover with sound sleepe, that kept them fast enclosed together, andonely to looke on them, hee wished a thousand times, that she wouldawake. for, in his judgement, she excelled all the women that everhe had seene, and doubted, whether she were some goddesse or no; sostrangely was he metamorphosed from folly, to a sensible apprehension,more then common. and so farre did this sodaine knowledge in himextend; that he could conceive of divine and celestiall things, andthat they were more to be admired and reverenced, then those of humaneor terrene consideration; wherefore the more gladly he contentedhimselfe, to tarry till she awaked of her owne accord. and althoughthe time of stay seemed tedious to him, yet notwithstanding, he wasovercome with such extraordinary contentment, as he had no power todepart thence, but stood as if he had bin glued fast to the ground.
after some indifferent respite of time, it chanced that the youngdamosel (who was named iphigenia) awaked before any of the otherwith her, and lifted up her head, with her eyes wide open, she sawchynon standing before her, leaning still on his staffe; whereatmarvailing not a little, she saide unto him: chynon, whither wanderestthou, or what dost thou seeke for in this wood? chynon, who notonely by his countenance but likewise his folly, nobility of birth,and wealthy possessions of his father, was generally knowne throughoutthe countrey, made no answere at all to the demand of iphigenia: butso soone as he beheld her eyes open, he began to observe them with aconstant regard, and being perswaded in his soule, that from themflowed such an unutterable singularity, as he had never felt tillthen. which the young gentlewoman well noting, she began to waxfearefull, least these stedfast lookes of his, should incite hisrusticity to some attempt, which might redound to her dishonour:wherefore awaking her women and servants, and they all being risen,she saide. farewell chynon, i leave thee to thine owne good fortune;whereto hee presently replyed, saying: i will go with you. now,although the gentlewoman refused his company, as dreading some acte ofincivility from him: yet could she not devise any way to be rid ofhim, till he had brought her to her owne dwelling, where takingleave mannerly of her, he went directly home to his fathers house,saying: nothing should compell him to live any longer in the muddycountry. and albeit his father was much offended hereat, and all therest of his kindred and friends: (yet not knowing how to helpe it)they suffered him to continue there still, expecting the cause of thishis so sodaine alteration, from the course of life, which contentedhim so highly before.
chynon being now wounded to the heart (where never any civillinstruction could before get entrance) with loves piercing dart, bythe bright beauty of iphigenia, mooved much admiration (falling fromone change to another) in his father, kindred, and all else thatknew him. for first, he requested of his father, that he might behabited and respected like to his other brethren, whereto right gladlyhe condiscended. and frequenting the company of civill youths,observing also the cariage of gentlemen, especially such as wereamorously enclined: he grew to a beginning in short time (to thewonder of every one) not onely to understand the first instructionof letters, but also became most skilfull, even amongst them that werebest exercised in philosophy. and afterward, love to iphigenia beingthe sole occasion of this happy alteration, not onely did his harshand clownish voyce convert it selfe more mildely, but also heebecame a singular musitian, and could perfectly play on anyinstrument. beside, he tooke delight in the riding and managing ofgreat horses, and finding himselfe of a strong and able body, heexercised all kinds of military disciplines, as well by sea, as on theland. and, to be breefe, because i would not seeme tedious in therepetition of all his vertues, scarsly had he attained to the fourthyeare, after he was thus falne in love, but hee became generallyknowne, to be the most civil, wise, and worthy gentleman, aswell forall vertues enriching the minde, as any whatsoever to beautifie thebody, that very hardly he could be equalled throughout the wholekingdome of cyprus.what shall we say then (vertuous ladies) concerning this chynon?surely nothing else, but that those high and divine vertues, infusedinto his gentle soule, were by envious fortune bound and shut up insome small angle of his intellect, which being shaken and set atliberty by love, (as having a farre more potent power then fortune, inquickning and reviving the dull drowsie spirits) declared his mightyand soveraigne authority, in setting free so many faire and preciousvertues unjustly detayned, to let the worlds eye behold them truly, bymanifest testimony from whence he can deliver those spiritssubjected to his power, and guid them (afterward) to the highestdegrees of honour. and although chynon by affecting iphigenia,failed in some particular things; yet notwithstanding, his fatheraristippus duely considering, that love had made him a man, whereas(before) he was no better then a beast: not onely endured allpatiently, but also advised him therein, to take such courses asbest liked himselfe. neverthelesse, chynon (who refused to be calledgalesus, which was his naturall name indeed) remembring that iphigeniatearmed him chynon, and coveting (under this title) to accomplishthe issue of his honest amorous desire: made many motions tociphaeus the father of iphigenia, that he would be pleased to lethim enjoy her in marriage. but ciphaeus told him, that he hadalready passed his promise for her, to a gentleman of rhodes, namedpasimondo, which promise he religiously intended to performe.
the time being come, which was concluded on for iphigeniaesmarriage, in regard that the affianced husband had sent for her:chynon thus communed with his owne thoughts. now is the time (quothhe) to let my divine mistresse see, how truly and honourably i doeaffect her, because (by her) i am become a man. but if i could bepossessed of her, i should growe more glorious, then the commoncondition of a mortall man, and have her i will, or loose my life inthe adventure. being thus resolved, he prevailed with divers younggentlemen his friends, making them of his faction, and secretlyprepared a shippe, furnished with all things for a naval fight,setting sodainly forth to sea, and hulling abroad in those parts bywhich the vessell should passe, that must convey iphigenia to rhodesto her husband. after many honours done to them, who were to transporther thence unto rhodes, being imbarked, they set saile upon theirbon viaggio.
chynon, who slept not in a businesse so earnestly importing him, seton them (the day following) with his ship, and standing aloft on thedecke, cryed out to them that had the charge of iphigenia, saying.strike your sayles, or else determine to be sunke in the sea. theenemies to chynon, being nothing danted with his words, prepared tostand upon their owne defence; which made chynon, after the formerspeeches delivered, and no answer returned, to command the graplingirons to be cast forth, which tooke such fast hold on the rhodiansshippe, that (whether they would or no) both the vessels joynedclose together. and he shewing himselfe fierce like a lyon, nottarrying to be seconded by any, stepped aboord the rhodians ship, asif he made no respect at all of them, and having his sword readydrawne in his hand (incited by the vertue of unfaigned love) laiedabout him on all sides very manfully. which when the men of rhodesperceived, casting downe their weapons, and all of them (as it were)with one voyce, yeelded themselves his prisoners: whereupon he said.
honest friends, neither desire of booty, nor hatred to you, didoccasion my departure from cyprus, thus to assaile you with drawneweapons: but that which hereto hath most mooved me, is a matter highlyimporting to me, and very easie for you to grant, and so enjoy yourpresent peace. i desire to have faire iphigenia from you, whom ilove above all other ladies living, because i could not obtaine her ofher father, to make her my lawfull wife in marriage. love is theground of my instant conquest, and i must use you as my mortallenemies, if you stand upon any further tearmes with me, and do notdeliver her as mine owne: for your pasimondo, must not enjoy what ismy right, first by vertue of my love, and now by conquest: deliver hertherefore, and depart hence at your pleasure.
the men of rhodes, being rather constrained thereto, then of anyfree disposition in themselves, with teares in their eyes, deliverediphigenia to chynon; who beholding her in like manner to weepe, thusspake unto her. noble lady, do not any way discomfort your selfe,for i am your chynon, who have more right and true title to you, andmuch better doe deserve to enjoy you, by my long continued affectionto you, then pasimondo can any way plead; because you belong to himbut onely by promise. so, bringing her aboord his owne ship, where thegentlemen his companions gave her kinde welcome, without touchingany thing else belonging to the rhodians, he gave them free liberty todepart.
chynon being more joyfull, by the obtaining of his hearts desire,then any other conquest else in the world could make him, after he hadspent some time in comforting iphigenia, who as yet sate sadlysighing; he consulted with his companions, who joyned with him inopinion, that their safest course was, by no meanes to returne tocyprus; and therefore all (with one consent) resolved to set saile forcandye, where every one made account, but especially chynon, in regardof ancient and new combined kindred, as also very intimate friends, tofinde very worthy entertainement, and so to continue there safely withiphigenia. but fortune, who was so favourable to chynon, in grantinghim so pleasing a conquest, to shew her constancy, so sodainly changedthe inestimable joy of our jocond lover, into as heavy sorrow anddisaster. for, foure houres were not fully compleated, since hisdeparture from the rhodians, but darke night came upon them, and hesitting conversing with his faire mistresse, in the sweetest solace ofhis soule; the winds began to blow roughly, the seas swelledangerly, and a tempest arose impetuously, that no man could see whathis duty was to do, in such a great unexpected distresse, nor how towarrant themselves from perishing.
if this accident were displeasing to poore chynon, i thinke thequestion were in vaine demanded: for now it seemeth to him, that thegodds had granted his cheefe desire, to the end he should dye with thegreater anguish, in losing both his love and life together. hisfriends likewise, felte the selfesame affliction, but especiallyiphigenia, who wept and greeved beyond all measure, to see the shipbeaten with such stormy billowes, as threatned her sinking everyminute. impatiently she cursed the love of chynon, greatly blaming hisdesperate boldnesse, and maintaining, that so violent a tempestcould never happen, but onely by the gods displeasure, who would notpermit him to have a wife against their will; and therefore thuspunished his proud presumption, not onely in his unavoidable death,but also that her life must perish for company.
she continuing in these wofull lamentations, and the marinerslabouring all in vaine, because the violence of the tempestencreased more and more, so that every moment they expectedwracking: they were carried (contrary to their owne knowledge) veryneere unto the isle of rhodes, which they being no way able toavoyd, and utterly ignorant of the coast; for safety of their lives,they laboured to land there if possibly they might. wherein fortunewas somewhat furtherous to them, driving them into a small gulfe ofthe sea, whereinto (but a little while before) the rhodians, from whomchynon had taken iphigenia, were newly entred with their ship. nor hadthey any knowledge each of other, till the breake of day (which madethe heavens to looke more clearly) gave them discovery of being withina flight shoote together. chynon looking forth, and espying the sameship which he had left the day before, hee grew exceedingsorrowfull, as fearing that which after followed, and therefore heewilled the mariners, to get away from her by all their best endeavour,and let fortune afterward dispose of them as she pleased; for into aworse place they could not come, nor fall into the like danger.
the mariners employed their very utmost paines, and all proved butlosse of time: for the winde was so sterne, and the waves soturbulent, that still they drove them the contrary way: so thatstriving to get forth of the gulfe, whether they would or no, theywere driven on land, and instantly knowne to the rhodians, whereofthey were not a little joyfull. the men of rhodes being landed, ranpresently to the neere-neighbouring villages, where dwelt diversworthy gentlemen, to whom they reported the arrivall of chynon, whatfortune befell them at sea, and that iphigenia might now berecovered againe with chastisement to chynon for his bold insolence.they being very joyfull of these good newes, took so many men asthey could of the same village, and ran immediately to the sea side,where chynon being newly landed and his people, intending flightinto a neere adjoyning forrest, for defence of himselfe and iphigenia,they were all taken, led thence to the village, and afterwards tothe chiefe city of rhodes.
no sooner were they arrived, but pasimondo, the intended husband foriphigenia (who had already heard the tydings) went and complained tothe senate, who appointed a gentleman of rhodes named lysimachus,and being that yeere soveraigne magistrate over the rhodians, to gowell provided for the apprehension of chynon and his company,committing them to prison, which accordingly was done. in this manner,the poore unfortunate lover chynon, lost his faire iphigenia, havingwon her in so short a while before, and scarsely requited with so muchas a kisse. but as for iphigenia, she was royally welcommed by manylords and ladies of rhodes, who so kindely comforted her, that shesoone forgotte all her greefe and trouble on the sea, remaining incompany of those ladies and gentlewomen, untill the day determined forher marriage.
at the earnest entreaty of divers rhodian gentlemen, who were in theship with iphigenia, and had their lives courteously saved bychynon: both he and his friends had their lives likewise spared,although pasimondo laboured importunately, to have them all put todeath; onely they were condemned to perpetuall imprisonment, which(you must thinke) was most greevous to them, as being now hopelesse ofany deliverance. but in the meane time, while pasimondo was orderinghis nuptiall preparation, fortune seeming to repent the wrongs she haddone to chynon, prepared a new accident, whereby to comfort him inthis deepe distresse, and in such manner as i will relate unto you.
pasimondo had a brother, yonger then he in yeeres, but not a jotinferiour to him in vertue, whose name was hormisda, and long time thecase had bene in question, for his taking to wife a faire younggentlewoman of rhodes, called cassandra; whom lysimachus the governourloved very dearly, and hindred her marriage with hormisda, by diversstrange accidents. now pasimondo perceiving, that his owne nuptialsrequired much cost and solemnity, hee thought it very convenient, thatone day might serve for both their weddings, which else would lanchinto more lavish expences, and therefore concluded, that his brotherhormisda should marry cassandra, at the same time as he weddediphigenia. hereupon, he consulted with the gentlewomans parents, wholiking the motion as well as he, the determination was set downe,and one day to effect the duties of both.
when this came to the hearing of lysimachus, it was very greatlydispleasing to him, because now he saw himselfe utterly deprived of alhope to attaine the issue of his desire, if hormisda receivedcassandra in marriage. yet being a very wise and worthy man, hedissembled his distaste, and began to consider on some apt meanes,whereby to disappoint the marriage once more, which he foundimpossible to be done, except it were by way of rape or stealth. andthat did not appeare to him any difficult matter, in regard of hisoffice and authority: onely it would seeme dishonest in him, by givingsuch an unfitting example. neverthelesse, after long deliberation,honour gave way to love, and resolutely he concluded to steale heraway, whatsoever became of it.
nothing wanted now, but a convenient company to assist him, andthe order how to have it done. then he remembred chynon and hisfriends, whom he detained as his prisoners, and perswaded himselfe,that he could not have a more faithfull friend in such a busines, thenchynon was. hereupon, the night following, he sent for him into hischamber, and being alone by themselves, thus he began. chynon (quothhe) as the gods are very bountifull, in bestowing their blessings onmen, so do they therein most wisely make proofe of their vertues,and such as they finde firme and constant, in all occurrences whichmay happen, then they make worthy (as valiant spirits) of t verybest and highest merites. now, they being willing to have more certainexperience of thy vertues, then those which heretofore thou hastshewne, within the bounds and limits of thy fathers possessions, whichi know to be superabounding: perhaps do intend to present thee otheroccasions, of more important weight and consequence.
for first of all (as i have heard) by the piercing solicitudes oflove, of a senselesse creature, that made thee to become a manendued with reason. afterward, by adverse fortune, and now againe bywearisome imprisonment, it seemeth that they are desirous to maketryall, whether thy manly courage be changed, or no, from that whichheretofore it was, when thou enjoyedst a matchlesse beauty, and losther againe in so short a while. wherefore, if thy vertue be such as ithath bin, the gods can never give thee any blessing more worthyacceptance, then she whom they are now minded to bestow on thee: inwhich respect, to the end that thou mayst re-assume thy wantedheroicke spirit, and become more couragious than ever heretofore, iwill acquaint thee withall more at large.
understand then noble chynon, that pasimondo, the onely glad manof thy misfortune, and diligent sutor after thy death, maketh all hasthee can possibly devise to do, to celebrate his marriage with thyfaire mistresse: because he would plead possession of the prey,which fortune (when she smiled) did first bestow, and (afterwardfrowning) tooke from thee againe. now, that it must needs be veryirkesome to thee (at least if thy love bee such, as i am perswadedit is) i partly can collect from my selfe, being intended to bewronged by his brother hormisda, even in the selfesame maner, and onhis marriage day, by taking faire cassandra from me, the onelyjewell of my love and life. for the prevention of two such notoriousinjuries, i see that fortune hath left us no other meanes, but onelythe vertue of our courages, and the helpe of our right hands, bypreparing our selves to armes, opening a way to thee, by a second rapeor stealth; and to me the first, for absolute possession of our divinemistresses. wherefore, if thou art desirous to recover thy losse, iwill not onely pronounce liberty to thee (which i thinke thou dostlittle care for without her) but dare also assure thee to enjoyiphigenia, so thou wilt assist me in mine enterprize, and follow me inmy fortune, if the gods do let them fall into our power.
you may well imagine, that chynons dismayed soule was not a littlecheared at these speeches; and therefore, without craving any longrespit of time for answer, thus he replyed. lord lysimachus, in such abusines as this is, you cannot have a faster friend then my selfe,at least, if such good hap may betide me, as you have more thenhalfe promised: and therefore do no more but command what you wouldhave to be effected by mee, and make no doubt of my courage in theexecution: whereon lysimachus made this answer. know then chynon(quoth he) that three dayes hence, these marriages are to beecelebrated in the houses of pasimondo and hormisda: upon which day,thou, thy friends, and my selfe (with some others, in whom i reposeespeciall trust) by the friendly favour of night, will enter intotheir houses, while they are in the middest of their joviall feasting;and (seizing on the two brides) beare them thence to a shippe, which iwill have lye in secret, waiting for our comming, and kill all such asshall presume to impeach us. this direction gave great contentmentto chynon, who remained still in prison, without revealing a word tohis owne friends, untill the limited time was come.
upon day, performed with great and magnificent triumph, there wasnot a corner in the brethrens houses, but it sung joy in the highestkey. lysimachus, after he had ordred all things as they ought to be,and the houre for dispat approached neere; hee made a division inthree parts, of chynon, his followers, and his owne friends, being allwell armed under their outward habites. having first used someencouraging speeches, for more resolute prosecution of the enterprize,hee sent troope secretly to the port, that they might not beehindred of going aboord the ship, when the urgent necessity shouldrequire it. passing with the other two traines of pasimondo, he leftthe one at the doore, that such as were in the house, might not shutthem up fast, and so impeach their passage forth. then with chynon,and the third band of confederates, he ascended the staires up intothe hall, where he found the brides with store of ladies andgentlewomen, all sitting in comely order at supper. rushing in roughlyamong the attendants, downe they threw the tables, and each of themlaying hold of his mistris, delivered them into the hands of theirfollowers, commanding that they should bee carried aboord the ship,for avoiding of further inconveniences.
this hurrie and amazement being in the house, the brides weeping,the ladies lamenting, and all the servants confusedly wondering;chynon and lysimachus (with their friends) having their weaponsdrawn in their hands, made all opposers to give them way, and sogayned the stair head for their owne descending. there stoodpasimonda, with an huge long staffe in his hand, to hinder theirpassage downe the stayres; but chynon saluted him so soundly on thehead, that it being cleft in twaine, he fell dead before his feete.his brother hormisda came to his rescue, and sped in the selfe-samemanner as he had done; so did divers other beside, whom the companionsto lysimachus and chynon, either slew out-right, or wounded.
so they left the house, filled with blood, teares, and outcries,going on together, without any hinderance, and so brought both thebrides aboord the ship, which they rowed away instantly with theiroares. for, now the shore was full of armed people, who came in rescueof the stolne ladies: but all in vaine, because they were lanched intothe main, and sayled on merrily towards candye. where being arrived,they were worthily entertained by honourable friends and kinsmen,who pacified all unkindnesses betweene them and their mistresses: and,having accepted them in lawfull marriage, there they lived in no meanejoy and contentment: albeit there was a long and troublesomedifference (about these rapes) betweene rhodes and cyprus.
but yet in the end, by the meanes of noble friends and kindred oneither side, labouring to have such discontentment appeased,endangering warre betweene the kingdomes: after a limited time ofbanishment, chynon returned joyfully with his iphigenia home tocyprus, and lysimachus with his beloved cassandra unto rhodes, eachliving in their severall countries, with much felicity.
the fift day, the second novell
wherein is declared, the firme loyaltie of a true lover: and how
fortune doth sometime humble men, to raise them
afterward to a farre higher degree
faire constance of liparis, fell in love with martuccio gomito:and hearing that he was dead, desperately she entred into a barke,which being transported by the windes to susa in barbary, fromthence she went to thunis, where she found him to be living. there shemade her selfe knowne to him, and he being in great authority, as aprivy counsellor to the king: he married the saide constance, andreturned richly home with air, to the island of liparis.
when the queene perceived, that the novell recited by pamphiluswas concluded, which she graced with especiall commendations: sheecommanded madam aemilia, to take her turne as next in order; whereuponshe thus began. me thinkes it is a matter of equity, that every oneshould take delight in those things, whereby the recompence may benoted, answerable to their one affection. and because i ratherdesire to walke along by the paths of pleasure, then dwell on anyceremonious or scrupulous affectation, i shall the more gladly obeyour queene to day, then yesterday i did our melancholly king.
understand then (noble ladies) that neere to sicily, there is asmall island, commonly called liparis, wherein (not long since)lived a yong damosell, named constance, born of very sufficientparentage in the same island. there dwelt also a yong man calledmartuccio gomito, of comely feature, well conditioned, and notunexpert in many vertuous qualities; affecting constance in hartymanner: and she so answerable to him in the same kinde, that to bein his company, was her onely felicity. martuccio coveting to enjoyher in marriage, made his intent knowne to her father: whoupbraiding him with poverty, tolde him plainly that he should not haveher. martuccio greeving to see himselfe thus despised, because hewas poore: made such good meanes, that he was provided of a smallbarke; and calling such friends (as he thought fit) to hisassociation, made a solemne vow, that he would never returne backeto liparis, untill he was rich, and in better condition.
in the nature and course of a rover or pirate, so put thence to sea,coasting all about barbarie, robbing and spoyling such as he met with;who were of no greater strength then himselfe: wherein fortune wasso favourable to him, that he became wealthy in a very short while.but as felicities are not alwayes permanent, so he and hisfollowers, not contenting themselves with sufficient riches: by greedyseeking to get more, happened to be taken by certaine ships of thesarazins, and so were robbed themselves of all that they had gotten,yet they resisted them stoutly a long while together, though it provedto the losse of many lives among them. when the sarazens had sunke hisship in the sea, they tooke him with them to thunis, where he wasimprisoned, and lived in extreamest misery.
newes came to liparis, not onely by one, but many more beside,that all those which departed thence in the small barke withmartuccio, were drowned in the sea, and not a man escaped. whenconstance, heard these unwelcome tydings (who was exceeding full ofgreefe, for his so desperate departure) she wept and lamentedextraordinarily, desiring now rather to dye, then live any longer. yetshe had not the heart, to lay any violent hand on her selfe, butrather to end her dayes by some new kinde of necessity. anddeparting privately from her fathers house, she went to the port orhaven, where (by chance) she found a small fisher-boate, lying distantfrom the other vessels, the owners whereof being all gone on shore,and it well furnished with masts, sailes, and oares, she entred intoit; and putting forth the oares, being somewhat skilfull in sayling,(as generally all the women of that island are) she so well guided thesailes, rudder, and oares, that she was quickly farre off from theland, and soly remained at the mercy of the windes. for thus she hadresolved with her selfe, that the boat being uncharged, and withouta guide, would either be overwhelmed by the windes, or split in peecesagainst some rocke; by which meanes she could [not] escape althoughshe would, but (as it was her desire) must needs be drowned.
in this determination, wrapping a mantle about her head, and lyingdowne weeping in the boats bottome, she hourely expected her finallexpiration: but it fell out otherwise, and contrary to her desperateintention, because the wind turning to the north, and blowing verygently, without disturbing the seas a jot, they conducted the smallboat in such sort, that after the night of her entering into it, andthe morrowes sailing untill the evening, it came within an hundreleagues of thunis and to a strond neere a towne called susa. the youngdamosell knew not whether she were on the sea or land; as one, who notby any accident hapning, lifted up her head to looke about her,neither intended ever to doe. now it came to passe, that as theboate was driven to the shore, a poore woman stood at the sea side,washing certaine fishermens nets; and seeing the boate comming towardsher under saile, without any person appearing in it, she wondredthereat not a little. it being close at the shore, and she thinkingthe fishermen to be asleepe therein: stept boldly, and looked into theboate, where she saw not any body, but onely the poore distresseddamosell, whose sorrowes having brought her now into a sound sleepe,the woman gave many cals before she could awake her, which at thelength she did, and looked very strangely about her.
the poore woman perceyving by her habite that she was a christian,demanded of her (in speaking latine) how it was possible for her,being all alone in the boate, to arrive there in this manner? whenconstance, heard her speake the latine tongue, she began to doubt,least some contrary winde had turned her backe to liparis againe,and starting up sodainly, to looke with better advice about her,shee saw her selfe at land: and not knowing the countrey, demandedof the poore woman where she was? daughter (quoth she) you are heerehard by susa in barbarie. which constance hearing, and plainlyperceyving, that death had denied to end her miseries, fearing leastshe should receive some dishonour, in such a barbarous unkindecountry, and not knowing what should now become of her, shee satedowne by the boates side, wringing her hands, and weeping bitterly.
the good woman did greatly compassionate her case, and prevailedso well by gentle speeches, that she conducted her into her owne poorehabitation, where at length she understoode, by what meanes sheehapned thither so strangely. and perceyving her to be fasting, she setsuch homely bread as she had before her, a few small fishes, and acrewse of water, praying her for to accept of that pooreentertainment, which meere necessity compelled her to do, and shewedher selfe very thankefull for it.
constance hearing that she spake the latine language so well;desired to know what she was. whereto the old woman thus answered:gentlewoman (quoth she) i am of trapanum, named carapresa, and am aservant in this countrey to certaine christian fishermen. the youngmaiden (albeit she was very full of sorrow) hearing her name to becarapresa, conceived it as a good augury to her selfe, and that shehad heard the name before, although she knew not what occasionshould move her thus to do. now began her hopes to quicken againe, andyet she could not relie upon what ground; nor was she so desirous ofdeath as before, but made more precious estimation of her life, andwithout any further declaration of her selfe or countrey, sheentreated the good woman (even for charities sake) to take pitty onher youth, and helpe her with such good advice, to prevent allinjuries which might happen to her, in such a solitary wofullcondition.
carapresa having heard her request, like a good woman as she was,left constance in her poore cottage, and went hastily to leave hernets in safety: which being done, she returned backe againe, andcovering constance with her mantle, led her on to susa with her, wherebeing arrived, the good woman began in this manner. constance, iwill bring thee to the house of a very worthy sarazin lady, to whomi have done many honest services, according as she pleased tocommand me. she is an ancient woman, full of charity, and to her iwill commend thee as best i may, for i am well assured, that shewill gladly entertaine thee, and use thee as if thou wert her owndaughter. now, let it be thy part, during thy time of remaining withher, to employ thy utmost diligence in pleasing her, by deservingand gaining her grace, till heaven shall blesse thee with betterfortune: and as she promised, so she performed.
the sarazine lady, being well stept into yeares, upon thecommendable speeches delivered by carapresa, did the more seriouslyfasten her eye on constance, and compassion provoking her to teares,she tooke her by the hand, and (in loving manner) kissed herfore-head. so she led her further into her house, where dwelt diversother women (but not one man) all exercising themselves in severalllabours, as working in all sorts of silke, with imbroideries of goldand silver, and sundry other excellent arts beside, which in shorttime were very familiar to constance, and so pleasing grew herbehaviour to the old lady, and all the rest beside; that they lovedand delighted in her wonderfully, and (by little and little) sheattained to the speaking of their language, although it were veryharsh and difficult.
constance continuing thus in the old ladies service at susa, andthought to be dead or lost in her owne fathers house; it fortuned,that one reigning then as king of thunis, who named himselfemariabdela: there was a young lord of great birth, and very powerfull,who lived as then in granada, and pleaded that the kingdome ofthunis belonged to him. in which respect, he mustred together a mightyarmy, and came to assault the king, as hoping to expell him. thesenewes comming to the eare of martuccio gomito, who spake the barbarianlanguage perfectly; and hearing it reported, that the king of thunismade no meane preparation for his owne defence: he conferred withone of his keepers, who had the custody of him, and the rest takenwith him, saying: if (quoth he) i could have meanes to speake with theking, and he were pleased to allow of my counsell, i can enstructhim in such a course, as shall assure him to win the honor of thefield. the guard reported these speeches to his master, whopresently acquainted the king therewith, and martuccio being sent for;he was commanded to speake his minde: whereupon he began in thismanner.
my gracious lord, during the time that i have frequented yourcountrey, i have heedfully observed, that the militarie disciplineused in your fights and battailes, dependeth more upon your archers,then any other men imployed in your war and therefore, if it couldbe so ordered, that this kinde of artillery may faile in yourenemies campe, and yours be sufficiently furnished therewith, youneede make no doubt of winning the battaile: whereto the king thusreplyed. doubtlesse, if such an act were possible to be done, it wouldgive great hope of successefull prevalling. sir, said martuccio, ifyou please it may be done, and i can quickly resolve you how. letthe strings of your archers bowes be made more soft and gentle, thenthose which heretofore they have formerly used; and next, let thenockes of the arrowes be so provided, as not to receive any other,then those pliant gentle strings. but this must be done so secretly,that your enemies may have no knowledge thereof, least they shouldprovide themselves in the same manner. now the reason (graciouslord) why thus i counsell you, is to this end. when the archers on theenemies side have shot their arrowes at your men, and yours in thelike maner at them: it followeth, that (upon meere constraint) theymust gather up your arrowes, to shoote them backe againe at you, forso long while as the battell endureth, as no doubt but your men wil dothe like to them. but your enemies finde themselves much deceived,because they can make no use of your peoples arrowes, in regard thatthe nockes are too narrow to receive their boystrous strings. whichwill fall out contrary with your followers, for the pliant stringsbelonging to your bowes, are as apt for their enemies great nocktarrowes, as their owne, and so they shall have free use of both,reserving them in plentifull store, when your adversaries must standunfurnished of any, but them that they cannot any way use.
this counsell pleased the king very highly, and he being a prince ofgreat understanding, gave order to have it accordingly followed, andthereby valiantly vanquished his enemies. heereupon, martuccio came tobe great in his grace, as also consequently rich, and seated in nomeane place of authority. now as worthy and commendable actions aresoone spread abroad, in honor of the man by whom they hapned: evenso the fame of this rare got victory, was quickly noysed throughoutthe countrey, and came to the hearing of poore constance, thatmartuccio gomito (whom she supposed so long since to be dead) wasliving, and in honourable condition. the love which formerly shebare unto him, being not altogether extinct in her heart; of a smallsparke, brake forth into a sodaine flame, and so encreased day by day,that her hope (being before almost quite dead) revived againe inchearfull manner.
having imparted all her fortunes to the good old lady with whomshe dwelt; she told her beside, that she had an earnest desire tosee thunis, to satisfie her eyes as well as her eares, concerningthe rumor blazed abroad. the good old lady commended her desire, and(even as if she had bene her mother) tooke her with her aboord abarke, and so sayled thence to thunis, where both she and constancefound honourable welcome, in the house of a kinsman to the sarazinlady. carapresa also went along with them thither, and her they sentabroad into the city, to understand the newes of martuccio gomito.after they knew for a certainty that he was living, and in greatauthority about the king, according as the former report went ofhim. then the good old lady, being desirous to let martuccio know,that his faire friend constance was come thither to see him; wenther selfe to the place of his abiding, and spake unto him in thismanner. noble martuccio, there is a servant of thine in my house,which came from liparis, and requireth to have a little privateconference with thee: but because i durst not trust any other with themessage, my selfe (at her entreaty) am come to acquaint theetherewith. martuccio gave her kinde and hearty thankes, and thenwent along with her to the house.
no sooner did constance behold him, but she was ready to dye withconceite of joy, and being unable to containe her passion: sodainelyshe threw her armes about his necke, and in meere compassion of hermany misfortunes, as also the instant solace of her soule (not beingable to utter one word) the teares trickled abundantly downe hercheekes. martuccio also seeing his faire friend, was overcome withexceeding admiration, and stood awhile, as not knowing what to say;till venting forth a vehement sighe, thus he spake. my deerest loveconstance! art thou yet living? it is a tedious long while since iheard thou wast lost, and never any tydings knowne of thee in thineowne fathers house. with which words, the teares standing in his eyes,most lovingly he embraced her, constance recounted to him all herfortunes, and what kindnesse she had receyved from the sarazinelady, since her first houre of comming to her. and after much otherdiscourse passing betweene them, martuccio departed from her, andreturning to the king his master, tolde him all the history of hisfortunes, and those beside of his love constance, being purposelyminded (with his gracious liking) to marry her according to thechristian law.
the king was much amazed at so many strange accidents, and sendingfor constance to come before him; from her owne mouth he heard thewhole relation of her continued affection to martuccio, whereuponhee saide. now trust me faire damosell, thou hast dearely deserved himto be thy husband. then sending for very costly jewels, and richpresents, the one halfe of them he gave to her, and the other tomartuccio, graunting them license withall, to marry according to theirowne mindes.
martuccio did many honors, and gave great gifts to the aged sarazinelady, with whom constance had lived so kindly respected: whichalthough she had no neede of, neither ever expected any suchrewarding; yet (conquered by their urgent importunity, especiallyconstance, who could not be thankfull enough to her) she wasenforced to receive them, and taking her leave of them weeping, sayledbacke againe to susa.
within a short while after, the king licensing their departurethence, they entred into a small barke, and carapresa with them,sailing on with prosperous gales of winde, untill they arrived atliparis, where they were entertained with generall rejoycing. andbecause their marriage was not sufficiently performed at thunis, inregard of divers christian ceremonies there wanting, their nuptialswere againe most honourably solemnized, and they lived (many yearesafter) in health and much happinesse.
the fift day, the third novell
wherein, the severall powers both of love and fortune, is
more at large approved
pedro bocamazzo, escaping away with a yong damosell which heloved, named angelina, met with theeves in his journey. the damosellflying fearfully into a forrest, by chance arriveth at a castle. pedrobeing taken by the theeves, and happening afterward to escape fromthem; commeth (accidentally) to the same castle where angelina was.and marrying her, they then returned home to rome.
there was not any one in the whole company, but much commended thenovell reported by madam aemilia, and when the queene perceived it wasended, she turned towards madam eliza, commanding her to continue ontheir delightfull exercise: whereto she declaring her willingobedience, began to speake thus. courteous ladies, i remember oneunfortunate night, which happened to two lovers, that were notindued with the greatest discretion. but because they had very manyfaire and happy dayes afterwards, i am the more willing for to let youheare it.
in the city of rome, which (in times past) was called the lady andmistresse of the world, though now scarsely so good as the waiting,maid: there dwelt sometime yong gentleman, named pedro boccamazzo,descended from one of the most honorable families in rome, who wasmuch enamoured of a beautifull gentlewoman, called angelina,daughter to one named gigliuozzo saullo, whose fortunes were none ofthe fairest, yet he greatly esteemed among the romanes. theentercourse of love betweene these twaine, had so equally enstructedtheir hearts and soule, that it could hardly be judged which of themwas the more fervent in affection. but he, not being inured to suchoppressing passions, and therefore the lesse able to support them,except he were sure to compasse his desire, plainly made the motion,that he might enjoy her in honourable mariage. which his parents andfriends hearing, they went to conferre with him, blaming him withover-much basenesse, so farre to disgrace himselfe and his stocke.beside, they advised the father to the maid, neither to credit whatpedro saide in this case, or to live in hope of any such match,because they all did wholly despise it.
pedro perceiving, that the way was shut up, whereby (and none other)he was to mount the ladder of his hopes; began to wax weary oflonger living: and if he could have won her fathers consent, hewould have maried her in the despight of all his friends.neverthelesse, he had a conceit hammering in his head, which if themaid would bee as forward as himselfe, should bring the matter to fulleffect. letters and secret intelligences passing still betweene, atlength he understood her ready resolution, to adventure with himthorough all fortunes whatsoever, concluding on their sodaine andsecret flight from rome. for which pedro did so well provide, thatvery early in a morning, and well mounted on horsebacke, they tookethe way leading unto alagna, where pedro had some honest friends, inwhom he reposed especiall trust. riding on thus thorow the countrey,having no leysure to accomplish their marriage, because they stoodin feare of pursuite: they were ridden above foure leagues fromrome, still shortning the way with their amorous discoursing.
it fortuned, that pedro having no certaine knowledge of the way, butfollowing a trackt guiding too farre on the left hand; rode quiteout of course, and came at last within sight of a small castle, out ofwhich (before they were aware) yssued twelve villaines, whomangelina sooner espyed, then pedro could do; which made her cry out tohim, saying: helpe deere love to save us, or else we shall beassayled. pedro then turning his horse so expeditiously as he could,and giving him the spurres as need required; mainly he galloppedinto a neere adjoyning forrest, more minding the following ofangelina, then any direction of way, or them that endeavoured to beehis hindrance. so that by often winding and turning about, as thepassage appeared troublesome to him, when he thought him selfe freeand furthest from them, he was round engirt, and seized on by them.when they had made him to dismount from his horse, questioning himof whence and what he was, and he resolving them therein, they fellinto a secret consultation, saying thus among themselves. this manis a friend to our deadly enemies, how can wee then otherwisedispose of him, but dreame him of all he hath, and in despight ofthe orsini (men in nature hatefull to us) hang him up heere on oneof these trees?
all of them agreeing in this dismall resolution, they commandedpedro to put off his garments, which he yeelding to do (albeitunwillingly) it so fell out, that five and twenty other theeves,came sodainly rushing in upon them, crying, kill, kill, and sparenot a man.
they which before had surprized pedro, desiring now to shift fortheir owne safetie, left him standing quaking in his shirt, and soranne away mainely to defend themselves. which the new crewperceyving, and that their number farre exceeded the other: theyfollowed to robbe them of what they had gotten, accounting it as apresent purchase for them. which when pedro perceyved, and saw nonetarrying to prey uppon him; hee put on his cloathes againe, andmounting on his owne horse, gallopped that way, which angelinabefore had taken: yet could he not descry any tracke or path, or somuch as the footing of a horse; but thought himselfe in sufficientsecurity, being rid of them that first seized on him, and also ofthe rest, which followed in the pursuite of them.
for the losse of his beloved angelina, he was the most wofull man inthe world, wandering one while this way, and then againe another,calling for her all about the forrest, without any answere returningto him. and not daring to ride backe againe, on he travailed still,not knowing where to make his arrivall. and having formerly heard ofsavage ravenous beasts, which commonly live in such unfrequentedforrests: he not onely was in feare of loosing his owne life, but alsodespayred much for his angelina, least some lyon or woolfe, hadtorne her body in peeces.
thus rode on poore unfortunate pedro, untill the breake of dayappeared, not finding any meanes to get forth of the forrest, stillcrying and calling for his fayre friend, riding many timesbackeward, when as hee thought hee rode forward, untill hee becameso weake and faint, what with extreame feare, lowd calling, andcontinuing so long awhile without any sustenance, that the whole daybeing thus spent in vaine, and darke night sodainly come uppon him, hewas not able to hold out any longer.
now was he in farre worse case then before, not knowing where, orhow to dispose of himselfe, or what might best be done in so great anecessity. from his horse he alighted, and tying him by the bridleunto a great tree, uppe he climbed into the same tree, fearing to bedevoured (in the night time) by some wilde beast, choosing rather tolet his horse perish, then himselfe. within a while after, the moonebeganne to rise, and the skies appeared bright and cleare: yet dursthee not nod, or take a nap, least he should fall out of the tree;but sate still greeving, sighing, and mourning, desparing of everseeing his angelina any more, for he could not be comforted by thesmallest hopefull perswasion, that any good fortune might befall herin such a desolate forrest, where nothing but dismall feares was to beexpected, and no likelihood that she should escape with life.
now, concerning poore affrighted angelina, who (as you heard before)knew not any place of refuge to flye unto: but even as it pleasedthe horse to carry her: she entred so farre into the forrest, that shecould not devise where to seeke her owne safety. and therefore, evenas it fared with her friend pedro, in the same manner did it fallout with her, wandering the whole night, and all the day following,one while taking one hopefull tracke, and then another, calling,weeping, wringing her hands, and greevously complaining of her hardfortune. at the length, perceiving that pedro came not to her atall, she found a little path (which she lighted on by great goodfortune) even when dark night was apace drawing, and followed it solong, till it brought her within the sight of a small poore cottage,whereto she rode on so fast as she could; and found therin a veryold man, having a wife rather more aged then he, who seeing her tobe without company, the old man spake thus unto her.
faire daughter (quoth he) whether wander you at such an unseasonablehoure, and all alone in a place so desolate? the damosell weeping,replied; that she had lost her company in the forrest, and enquiredhow neere shee was to alagna. daughter (answered the old man) thisis not the way to alagna, for it is above six leagues hence. then sheedesired to know, how farre off she was from such houses, where shemight have any reasonable lodging? there are none so neere, said theold man, that day light will give you leave to reach. may it pleaseyou then good father (replied angelina) seeing i cannot travalle anywhether else; for gods sake, to et me remaine heere with you thisnight. daughter answered the good old man, we can gladly give youentertainement here, for this night, in such poore manner as yousee: but let mee tell you withall, that up and downe these woods (aswell by night as day) walke companies of all conditions, and ratherenemies then friends, who do us many greevous displeasures and harmes.now if by misfortune, you being here, any such people should come, andseeing you so lovely faire, as indeed you are, offer you any shameor injurie: alas you see, it lies not in our power to lend you anyhelp or succour. i thought it good (therefore) to acquaint youheerewith, because if any such mischance do happen, you should notafterward complaine of us.
the yong maiden, seeing the time to be so farre spent, albeit theold mans words did much dismay her, yet she thus replyed. if it be thewill of heaven, both you and i shall be defended from anymisfortune: but if any such mischance do happen, i account themeanes lesse deserving grief, if i fall into the mercy of men, then tobe devoured by wild beasts in this forrest. so, being dismountedfrom her horse, and entred into the homely house; shee supt poorelywith the old man and his wife, with such meane cates as theirprovision affoorded: and after supper, lay downe in her garments onthe same poore pallet, where the aged couple tooke their rest, and wasvery well contented therewith, albeit she could not refraine fromsighing and weeping, to be thus divided from her deare pedro, of whoselife and welfare she greatly despaired.
when it was almost day, she heard a great noise of people travailingby, whereupon sodainly slie arose, and ranne into a garden plot, whichwas on the backside of the poore cottage, espying in one of thecorners a great stacke of hay, wherein she hid her selfe, to theend, that travelling strangers might not readily finde her there inthe house. scarsely was she fully hidden, but a great company oftheeves and villaines, finding the doore open, rushed into thecottage, where looking round about them for some booty, they saw thedamosels horse stand ready sadled, which made them demand to whom itbelonged. the good old man, not seeing the maiden present there, butimmagining that she had made some shift for her selfe, answeredthus. gentlemen, there is no body here but my wife and my selfe: asfor this horse, which seemeth to be escaped from the owner; hee camehither yesternight, and we gave him house-roome heere, rather thento be devoured by wolves abroad. then said the principall of thetheevish crew: this horse shall be ours, in regard he hath no othermaster, and let the owner come claime him of us.
when they had searched every corner of the poore cottage, andfound no such prey as they looked for, some of them went into thebackeside; where they had left their javelins and targets, wherwiththey used commonly to travaile. it fortuned, that one of them, beingmore subtily suspitious then the rest, thrust his javelin into thestacke of hay, in the very same place where the damosell lay hidden,missing very little of killing her; for it entred so farre, that theiron head pierced quite thorough her garments, and touched her leftbare brest: whereupon, shee was ready to cry out, as fearing thatshe was wounded: but considering the place where she was, she laystill, and spake not a word. this disordered company, after they hadfed on some young kids, and other flesh which they brought with themthither, they went thence about their theeving exercise, taking thedamosels horse along with them.
after they were gone a good distance off, the good old man beganthus to question his wife. what is become of (quoth hee) our younggentlewoman, which came so late to us yesternight? i have not seen herto day since our arising. the old woman made answer, that she knew notwhere she was, and sought all about to finde her. angelinaes fearesbeing well over-blowne, and hearing none of the former noise, whichmade her the better hope of their departure, came forth of thehay-stack; wherof the good old man was not a little joyfull, andbecause she had so well escaped from them: so seeing it was nowbroad day-light, he said unto her. now that the morning is sofairely begun, if you can be so well contented, we will bring you to acastle, which stands about two miles and an halfe hence, where youwill be sure to remaine in safety. but you must needs travaile thitheron foot, because the nightwalkers that happened hither, have takenaway your horse with them.
angelina making little or no account of such a losse, entreated themfor charities sake, to conduct her to that castle, which accordinglythey did, and arrived there betweene seven and eight of the clock. thecastle belonged to one of the orsini, being called, liello di campo difiore, and by great good fortune, his wife was then there, she being avery vertuous and religious lady. no sooner did she looke uponangelina, but she knew her immediately, and entertaining her verywillingly, requested, to know the reason of her thus arriving there:which she at large related, and moved the lady (who likewise knewpedro perfectly well) to much compassion, because he was a kinsman anddeare friend to her husband; and understanding how the theeves hadsurprized him, she feared, that he was slaine among them, whereuponshe spake thus to angelina. seeing you know not what is become of mykinsman pedro, you shall remaine here with me, untill such time, as(if we heare no other tidings of him) you may with safety be sentbacke to rome.
pedro all this while sitting in the tree, so full of griefe, as noman could be more; about the houre of midnight (by the brightsplendour of the moone) espied about some twenty wolves, who, so sooneas they got a sight of the horse, ran and engirt him round about.the horse when he perceived them so neere him, drew his head sostrongly back-ward, that breaking the reines of his bridle, helaboured to escape from them. but being beset on every side, andutterly unable to helpe himself, he contended with his teeth and feetein his owne defence, till they haled him violently to the ground,and tearing his body in pieces, left not a jot of him but the barebones, and afterward ran ranging thorow the forest. at this sight,poore pedro was mightily dismaied, fearing to speed no better then hishorse had done, and therefore could not devise what was best to bedone; for he saw no likelihood, of getting out of the forest withlife. but day-light drawing on apace, and he almost dead with cold,having stood quaking so long in the tree; at length by continualllooking every where about him, to discerne the least glimpse of anycomfort; he espied a great fire, which seemed to be about halfe a mileoff from him.
by this time it was broad day, when he descended downe out of thetree, (yet not without much feare) and tooke his way towards the fire,where being arrived, he found a company of shepheards banquettingabout it, whom he curteously saluting, they tooke pity on hisdistresse, and welcommed him kindly. after he had tasted of suchcheare as they had, and was indifferently refreshed by the goodfire; he discoursed his hard disasters to them, as also how hehappened thither, desiring to know, if any village or castle wereneere there about, where he might in better manner releeve himselfe.the shepheards told him, that about a mile and an halfe from thence,was the castle of signior liello di campo di fiore, and that hislady was residing there; which was no meane comfort to poore pedro,requesting that one of them would accompany him thither, as two ofthem did in loving manner, to rid him of all further feares.
when he was arrived at the castle, and found there divers of hisfamiliar acquaintance: he laboured to procure some meanes, that thedamosell might bee sought for in the forrest. then the lady callingfor her, and bringing her to him; he ran and caught her in hisarmes, being ready to swoune with conceite of joy, for never could anyman be more comforted, then he was at the sight of his angelina, andquestionlesse, her joy was not a jot inferiour to his, such a simpathyof firme love was settled betweene them. the lady of the castle, aftershe had given them very gracious entertainment, and understood thescope of their bold adventure; she reproved them both somewhatsharpely, for presuming so farre without the consent of their parents.but perceiving (notwithstanding all her remonstrances) that theycontinued still constant in their resolution, without any inequalityof either side; shee saide to her selfe. why should this matter be anyway offensive to me? they love each other loyally; they are notinferiour to one another in birth, but in fortune; they are equallyloved and allied to my husband, and their desire is both honest andhonorable. moreover, what know i, if it be the will of heaven tohave it so? theeves intended to hang him, in malice to his name andkinred, from which hard fate he hath happily escaped. her life wasendangered by a sharpe pointed javeline, and yet her fairer starreswould not suffer her so to perish: beside, they have both escapedthe fury of ravenous wild beasts; and all these are apparant signes,that future comforts should recompence former passed misfortunes;farre be it therefore from me, to hinder the appointment of theheavens.
then turning her selfe to them, thus she proceeded. if your desirebe to joyne in honourable marriage, i am well contented therewith, andyour nuptials shall here be solemnized at my husbands charges.afterward both he and i will endeavour, to make peace betweene you andyour discontented parents. pedro was not a little joyfull at her kindeoffer, and angelina much more then he; so they were married togetherin the castle, and worthily feasted by the lady, as forrestentertainment could permit, and there they enjoyed the first fruits oftheir love. within a short while after, the lady and they (wellmounted on horsebacke, and attended with an honourable traine)returned to rome; where her lord liello and she prevailed so well withpedroes angry parents: that the variance ended in love and peace,and afterward they lived lovingly together, till old age made themas honourable, as their true and mutuall affection formerly had done.
the fift day, the fourth novell
declaring the discreete providence of parents, in care of their
childrens love and their owne credit, to cut off
inconveniences, before they do proceede too farre
ricciardo manardy, was found by messer lizio da valbonna, as he satefast asleepe at his daughters chamber window, having his hand fastin hers, and she sleeping in the same manner. whereupon, they arejoyned together in marriage, and their long loyall love mutuallyrecompenced.
madam eliza having ended her tale, and heard what commendationsthe whole company gave thereof; the queene commanded philostratus,to tell a novell agreeing with his owne minde, smiling thereat, thusreplyed. faire ladies, i have bene so often checkt and snapt, for myyesterdayes matter and argument of discoursing, which was both tediousand offensive to you; that if i intended to make you any amends, ishould now undertake to tell such a tale, as might put you into amirthfull humour. which i am determined to do, in relating a briefeand pleasant novell, not any way offensive (as i trust) butexemplary for some good notes of observation.
not long since, there lived in romania, a knight, a very honestgentleman, and well qualified, whose name was messer lizio davalbonna, to whom it fortuned, that (at his entrance into age) byhis lady and wife, called jaquemina, he had a daughter, the verychoycest and goodliest gentlewoman in all those places. now becausesuch a happy blessing (in their olde yeeres) was not a littlecomfortable to them; they thought themselves the more bound in duty,to be circumspect of her education, by keeping her out ofover-frequent companies, but onely such as agreed best with theirgravity, and might give the least ill example to their daughter, whowas named catharina; as making no doubt, but by this their providentand wary respect, to match her in marriage answerable to their liking.there was also a yong gentleman, in the very flourishing estate of hisyouthfull time, descended from the family of the manardy dabrettinoro, named messer ricciardo, who oftentimes frequented thehouse of messer lizio, and was a continuall welcome guest to histable, messer lizio and his wife making the like account of him,even as if hee [had] bene their owne sonne.
this young gallant, perceiving the maiden to be very beautifull,of singular behaviour, and of such yeeres as was fit for marriage,became exceeding enamoured of her, yet concealed his affection soclosely as he could, which was not so covertly carried, but that sheperceived it, and grew into as good liking of him. many times he hadan earnest desire to have conference with her, which yet still hedeferred, as fearing to displease her; at the length he lighted onan apt opportunity, and boldly spake to her in this manner. fairecatharina, i hope thou wilt not let me die for thy love? signiorricciardo (replyed she suddenly againe) i hope you will extend thelike mercy to me, as you desire that i should shew to you. thisanswere was so pleasing to messer ricciardo, that presently hesaide. alas deare love, i have dedicated all my fairest fortunes onelyto thy service, so that it remaineth soly in thy power to dispose ofme as best shall please thee, and to appoint such times of privateconversation, as may yeeld more comfort to my poore afflicted soule.
catharina standing musing awhile, at last returned him this answere.signio ricciardo, quoth she, you see what a restraint is set on myliberty, how short i am kept from conversing with any one, that i holdthis our enterparlance now almost miraculous. but if you coulddevise any convenient meanes, to admit us more familiar freedome,without any prejudice to mine honour, or the least distaste to myparents; do but enstruct it, and i will adventure it. ricciardo havingconsidered on many wayes and meanes, thought one to be the fittestof all; and therefore thus replyed. catharina (quoth he) the onelyplace for our more private talking together, i conceive to be thegallery over your fathers garden. if you can winne your mother tolet you lodge there, i will make meanes to climbe over the wall, andat the goodly gazing window, we may discourse so long as we please.now trust me deare love (answered catharina) no place can be moreconvenient for our purpose, there shall we heare the sweete birdssing, especially the nightingale which i have heard singing thereall the night long; i will breake the matter to my mother, and how ispeede, you shall heare further from me. so, with divers partingkisses, they brake off conference, till their next meeting.
on the day following, which was towards the ending of the monethof may, catharina began to complaine to her mother that the season wasover-hot and tedious, to be still lodged in her mothers chamber,because it was an hinderance to her sleeping; and wanting rest, itwould be an empairing of her health. why daughter (quoth the mother)the weather (as yet) is not so hot, but (in my minde) you may verywell endure it. alas mother, saide she, aged people, as you and myfather are, do not feele the heates of youthfull blood, by reason ofyour farre colder complexion, which is not to be measured by youngeryeeres. i know that well daughter, replyed the mother; but is it in mypower, to make the weather warme or coole, as thou perhaps wouldsthave it? seasons are to be suffered, according to their severallqualities; and though the last night might seeme hot, this nextensuing may be cooler, and then thy rest will be the better. nomother, quoth catharina, that cannot be; for as summer proceedethon, so the heate encreaseth, and no expectation can be of temperateweather, untill it groweth to winter againe. why daughter, saide themother, what wouldest thou have me to do? mother (quoth she) if itmight stand with my fathers good liking and yours, i would be sparedfrom the garden gallery, which is a great deale more coole lodged.there shall i heare the sweete nightingale sing, as every night sheuseth to do, and many other pretty birdes beside, which i cannot dolodging in your chamber.
the mother loving her daughter dearely, as being somewhatover-fond of her, and very willing to give her contentment; promisedto impart her minde to her father, not doubting but to compasse whatshee requested. when she had mooved the matter to messer lizio whoseage made him somewhat froward and teasty; angerly said to his wife.why how now woman? cannot our daughter sleepe, except she heare thenightingale sing? let there be a bed made for her in the oven, andthere let the crickets make her melody. when catharina heard thisanswere from her father, and saw her desire to be disappointed; notonely could she take any rest the night following, but also complainedmore of the heate then before, not suffering her mother to take anyrest, which made her go angerly to her husband in the morning, saying.why husband, have we but one onely daughter, whom you pretend tolove right dearly, and yet can you be so carelesse of her, as to denieher a request, which is no more then reason? what matter is it toyou or me, to let her lodge in the garden gallery? is her youngblood to be compared with ours? can our weake and crazie bodies, feelethe frolicke temper of hers? alas, she is hardly (as yet) out of herchildish yeeres, and children have many desires farre differing fromours: the singing of birdes is rare musicke to them, and chiefly thenightingale; whose sweete notes will provoke them to rest, whenneither art or physicke can do it.
is it even so wife? answered messer lizio. must your will and minebe governed by our daughter? well be it so then, let her bed be madein the garden gallerie, but i will have the keeping of the key, bothto locke her in at night, and set her at liberty every morning. woman,woman, yong wenches are wily, many wanton crotchets are busie in theirbraines, and to us that are aged, they sing like lapwings, tellingus one thing, and intending another; talking of nightingales, whentheir mindes run on cocke-sparrowes. seeing wife, she must needes haveher minde, let yet your care and mine extend so farre, to keepe herchastity uncorrupted, and our credulity from being abused. catharinahaving thus prevailed with her mother, her bed made in the gardengallerie, and secret intelligence given to ricciardo, for preparinghis meanes of accesse to her window; old provident lizio lockes thedoore to bed-ward, and gives her liberty to come forth in the morning,for his owne lodging was neere to the same gallery.
in the dead and silent time of night, when all (but lovers) taketheir rest; ricciardo having provided a ladder of ropes, with graplinghookes to take hold above and below, according as he had occasion touse it. by helpe thereof, first he mounted over the garden wall, andthen climbde up to the gallery window, before which (as is every wherein italie) was a little round engirting tarras, onely for a man tostand upon, for making cleane the window, or otherwise repairing it.many nights (in this manner) enjoyed they their meetings,entermixing their amorous conference with infinite kisses and kindeembraces, as the window gave leave, he sitting in the tarras, anddeparting alwayes before breake of day, for feare of beingdiscovered by any.
but, as excesse of delight is the nurse to negligence, and begettethsuch an overpresuming boldnesse, as afterward proveth to be saucedwith repentance: so came it to passe with our over-fond lovers, inbeing taken tardy through their owne folly. after they had manytimes met in this manner, the nights (according to the season) growingshorter and shorter, which their stolne delight made them lesserespective of, then was requisite in an adventure so dangerous: itfortuned, that their amorous pleasure had so farre transported them,and dulled their senses in such sort, by these their continuallnightly watchings; that they both fell fast asleepe, he having hishand closed in hers, and she one arme folded about his body, andthus they slept till broade day light. old messer lizio, whocontinually was the morning cocke to the whole house, going foorthinto his garden, saw how his daughter and ricciardo were seated at thewindow. in he went againe, and going to his wives chamber, saide toher. rise quickly wife, and you shall see, what made your daughterso desirous to lodge in the garden gallery. i perceive that shee lovedto heare the nightingale, for she hath caught one, and holds himfast in her hand. is it possible, saide the mother, that ourdaughter should catch a live nightingale in the darke? you shall seethat your selfe, answered messer lizio, if you will make hast, andgo with me.she, putting on her garments in great haste, followed her husband,and being come to the gallery doore, he opened it very softly, andgoing to the window, shewed her how they both sate fast asleepe, andin such manner as hath bene before declared: whereupon, sheeperceiving how ricciardo and catharina had both deceived her, wouldhave made an outcry, but that messer lizio spake thus to her. wife, asyou love me, speake not a word, neither make any noyse: for, seeingshee hath loved ricciardo without our knowledge, and they have hadtheir private meetings in this manner, yet free from any blamefuimputation; he shall enjoy her, and she him. ricciardo is a gentleman,well derived, and of rich possessions, it can be no disparagement tous, that catharina match with him in mariage, which he neithershall, or dare deny to do, in regard of our lawes severity; forclimbing up to my window with his ladder of ropes, whereby his life isforfeited to the law, except our daughter please to spare it, as itremaineth in her power to doe, by accepting him as her husband, oryeelding his life up to the law, which surely she will not suffer,their love agreeing together in such mutuall manner, and headventuring so dangerously for her. madam jaquemina, perceiving thather husband spake very reasonably, and was no more offended at thematter; stept side with him behinde the drawne curtaines, untillthey should awake of themselves. at the last, ricciardo awaked, andseeing it was so farre in the day, thought himselfe halfe dead, andcalling to catharina, saide.
alas deare love! what shall we doe? we have slept too long, andshall be taken here.
at which words, messer lizio stept forth from behind thecurtaines, saying. nay, signior ricciardo, seeing you have foundsuch an unbefitting way hither, we will provide you a better foryour backe returning.
when ricciardo saw the father and mother both there present, hecould not devise what to do or say, his senses became so strangelyconfounded; yet knowing how hainously he had offended, if thestrictnesse of law should bee challenged against him, falling on hisknees, he saide. alas messer lizio, i humbly crave your mercy,confessing my selfe well worthy of death, that knowing the sharperigour of the law, i would presume so audaciously to breake it. butpardon me worthy sir, my loyall and unfeigned love to your daughtercatharina, hath bene the only cause of my transgressing.
ricciardo (replied messer lizio) the love i beare thee, and thehonest confidence i do repose in thee, step up (in some measure) toplead thine excuse, especially in the regard of my daughter, whom iblame thee not for loving, but for this unlawfull way of presumingto her. neverthelesse, perceiving how the case now standeth, andconsidering withall, that youth and affection were the ground of thineoffence: to free thee from death, and my selfe from dishonour,before thou departest hence, thou shalt espouse my daughter catharina,to make her thy lawfull wife in marriage, and wipe off all scandall tomy house and me. all this while was poore catharina on her kneeslikewise to her mother, who (notwithstanding this her boldadventure) made earnest suite to her husband to remit all, becausericciardo right gladly condiscended, as it being the maine issue ofhis hope and desire; to accept his catharina in marriage, wheretoshe was as willing as he. messer lizio presently called for theconfessour of his house, and borrowing one of his wives rings,before they went out of the gallery; ricciardo and catharina wereespoused together, to their no little joy and contentment.
now had they more leasure for further conference, with the parentsand kindred to ricciardo, who being no way discontented with thissudden match, but applauding it in the highest degree; they werepublikely maried againe in the cathedrall church, and veryhonourable triumphes performed at the nuptials, living long after inhappy prosperity.
the fift day, the fifth novell
wherein may be observed, what quarrels and contentions are
occasioned by love; with some particular description,
concerning the sincerity of a loyall friend
guidotto of cremona, out of this mortall life, left a daughter ofhis, with jacomino of pavia. giovanni di severino, and menghino daminghole, fell both in love with the young maiden, and fought for her;who being afterward knowne to be the sister to giovanni, she was givenin mariage to menghino.
all the ladies laughing heartily, at the novell of thenightingale, so pleasingly delivered by philostratus, when they sawthe same to be fully ended, the queene thus spake. now trust mephilostratus, though yesterday you did much oppresse mee withmelancholly, yet you have made me such an amends to day, as we havelittle reason to complaine any more of you. so converting her speechto madam neiphila, shee commanded her to succeede with herdiscourse, which willingly she yeelded to, beginning in this manner.seing it pleased philostratus, to produce his novell out of romania: imeane to walke with him in the same jurisdiction, concerning what i amto say.
there dwelt sometime in the city of fano, two lombards, the onebeing named guidotto of cremona, and the other jacomino of pavia,men of sufficient entrance into yeares, having followed the warres (assouldiers) all their youthfull time. guidotto feeling sicknesse toover-master him, and having no sonne, kinsman, or friend, in whom hemight repose more trust, then he did in jacomino: having longconference with him about his worldly affaires, and setled his wholeestate in good order; he left a daughter to his charge, about tenyeeres of age, with all such goods as he enjoyed, and then departedout of this life. it came to passe, that the city of faenza, long timebeing molested with tedious warres, and subjected to very servilecondition; beganne now to recover her former strength, with freepermission (for all such as pleased) to returne and possesse theirformer dwellings. whereupon, jacomino (having sometime bene aninhabitant there) was desirous to live in faenza againe, convayingthither all his goods, and taking with him also the young girle, whichguidotto had left him, whom hee loved, and respected as his ownechilde.
as shee grew in stature, so she did in beauty and vertuousqualities, as none was more commended throughout the whole city, forfaire, civill, and honest demeanour, which incited many amorously toaffect her. but (above all the rest) two very honest young men, ofgood fame and repute, who were so equally in love addicted to her,that being. jealous of each others fortune, in preventing of theirseverall hopefull expectation; a deadly hatred grew suddenlybetweene them, the one being named giovanni de severino, and the othermenghino de minghole. either of these two young men, before themaide was fifteene yeeres old, laboured to be possessed of her inmarriage, but her guardian would give no consent thereto: wherefore,perceiving their honest intended meaning to be frustrated, they nowbegan to busie their braines, how to forestall one another by craftand circumvention.
jacomino had a maide-servant belonging to his house, somewhataged, and a manservant beside, named grinello, of mirthfulldisposition, and very friendly, with whom giovanni grew in greatfamiliarity, and when he found time fit for the purpose, he discoveredhis love to him, requesting his furtherance and assistance, incompassing the height of his desire, with bountifull promises ofrich rewarding; wheret grinello returned this answere. i know nothow to sted you in this case, but when my master shall sup foorth atsome neighbours house, to admit your entrance where shee is:because, if i offer to speake to her, she never will stay to hearemee. wherefore, if my service this way may doe you any good, i promiseto performe it; doe you beside, as you shall finde it mostconvenient for you. so the bargaine was agreed on betweene them, andnothing else now remained, but to what issue it should sort in theend. menghino, on the other side, having entred into thechamber-maides acquaintance, sped so well with her, that she deliveredso many messages from him, as had (already) halfe won the liking ofthe virgin; passing further promises to him beside, of bringing him tohave conference with her, whensoever her master should be absentfrom home. thus menghino being favoured (on the one side) by the bychamber-maide, and giovanni (on the other) by trusty grinello; theiramorous warre was now on foote, and diligently followed by boththeir sollicitors. within a short while after, by the procurement ofgrinello, jacomino was invited by a neighbour to supper, in company ofdivers his familiar friends, whereof intelligence being given togiovanni; a conclusion passed betweene them, that (upon a certainesignale given) he should come, and finde the doore standing readyopen, to give him all accesse unto the affected mayden.
the appointed night being come, and neither of these hot loversknowing the others intent, but their suspition being alike, andencreasing still more and more; they made choyce of certaine friendsand associates, well armed and provided, for eithers safer entrancewhen need should require.
menghino stayed with his troope, in a neere neighbouring house tothe mayden, attending when the signall would be given: but giovanniand his consorts, were ambushed somewhat further off from the house,and both saw when jacomino went foorth to supper. now grinello and thechambermaide began to vary, which should send the other out of theway, till they had effected their severall invention; wherupongrinello said to her. what maketh thee to walke thus about thehouse, and why doest thou not get thee to bed? and thou (quoth themaide) why doest thou not goe to attend on our master, and tarry forhis returning home? i am sure thou hast supt long agoe, and i knowno businesse here in the house for thee to doe. thus (by no meanes)the one could send away the other, but either remained as the othershinderance.
but grinello remembring himselfe, that the houre of hisappointment with giovanni was come, he saide to himselfe. what carei whether our olde maide be present, or no? if she disclose anything that i doe, i can be revenged on her when i list. so, havingmade the signall, he went to open the doore, even when giovanni (andtwo of his confederates) rushed into the house, and finding thefaire young maiden sitting in the hall, laide hands on her, to beareher away. the damosell began to resist them, crying out for helpe soloude as she could, as the olde chamber-maide did the like: whichmenghino hearing, he ranne thither presently with his friends, andseeing the young damosell brought well-neere out of the house; theydrew their swords, crying out: traytors, you are but dead men, here isno violence to be offered, neither is this a booty for such basegroomes. so they layed about them lustily, and would not permit themto passe any further. on the other side, upon this mutinous noyseand outcry, the neighbours came foorth of their houses, with lights,staves, and clubbes, greatly reproving them for this out-rage, yetassisting menghino: by meanes whereof, after a long time ofcontention, menghino recovered the mayden from giovanni, and placedher peaceably in jacominoes house.
no sooner was this hurly burly somewhat calmed, but the serjeants tothe captine of the city, came thither, and apprehended divers of themutiners: among whom were menghino, giovanni, and grinello, committingthem immediately to prison. but after every thing was pacified, andjacomino returned home to his house from supper; he was not a littleoffended at so grosse an injury. when he was fully informed, how thematter happened, and apparantly perceived, that no blame at allcould be imposed on the mayden: he grew the better contented,resolving with himselfe (because no more such inconveniences shouldhappen) to have her married so soone as possibly he could.
when morning was come the kindred and friends on either side,understanding the truth of the errour committed, and knowing beside,what punishment would be inflicted on the prisoners, if jacominopressed the matter no further, then as with reason and equity wellhe might; they repaired to him, and (in gentle speeches) entreatedhim, not to regard a wrong offered by unruly and youthfull people,meerely drawne into the action by perswasion of friends; submittingboth themselves, and the offendors, to such satisfaction as [he]pleased to appoint them. jacomino, who had seene and observed manythings in his time, and was a man of sound understanding, returnedthem this answer.
gentlemen, if i were in mine owne country, as now i am in yours, iwould as for wardly confesse my selfe your friend, as here i mustneedes fall short of any such service, but even as you shall please tocommand me. but plainely, and without all further ceremoniouscomplement, i must agree to whatsoever you can request; as thinkingyou to be more injured by me, then any great wrong that i havesustained. concerning the young damosell remaining in my house, she isnot (as many have imagined) either of cremona, or pavia, but borne afaentine, here in this citie: albeit neither my selfe, she, or he ofwhome i had her, did ever know it, or yet could learne whosedaughter she was. wherefore, the suite you make to me, should rather(in duty) be mine to you: for shee is a native of your owne, doe rightto her, and then you can doe no wrong unto mee.
when the gentlemen understood, that the mayden was borne infaenza, they marvelled thereat, and after they had thanked jacominofor his curteous answer; they desired him to let them know, by whatmeanes the damosell came into his custody, and how he knew her to beborne in faenza: when hee, perceiving them attentive to heare him,began in this manner.
understand worthy gentlemen, that guidotto of cremona, was mycompanion and deare friend, who growing neere to his death, tolde methat when this city was surprized by the emperour frederigo, and allthings committed to sacke and spoile; he and certaine of hisconfederates entred into a house, which they found to bee wellfurnished with goods, but utterly forsaken of the dwellers, onely thispoore mayden excepted, being then aged but two yeeres, orthereabout. as hee mounted up the steps, with intent to depart fromthe house; she called him father, which word moved him socompassionately, that he went backe againe, brought her away with him,and all things of worth which were in the house: going thenceafterward to fano, and there deceasing, hee left her and all his goodsto my charge; conditionally, that i should see her married when duetime required, and bestow on her the wealth which he had left her.now, very true it is, although her yeeres are convenient for marriage,yet i could never finde any one to bestow her on, at least that ithought fitting for her: howbeit i will listen thereto much morerespectively, before any other such accident shall happen.
it came to passe, that in the reporting of this discourse, there wasthen a gentleman in the company, named guillemino da medicina, whoat the surprizall of the city, was present with guidotto of cremona,and knew well the house which he had ransacked, the owner whereofwas also present with him, wherefore taking him aside, he said to him.bernardino, hearest thou what jacomino hath related? yes very well,replyed bernardino, and remember withall, that in that dismallbloody combustion, i lost a little daughter, about the age as jacominospeaketh. questionlesse then replyed guillemino, she must needs be thesame young mayden, for i was there at the same time, and in the house,whence guidotto did bring both the girle and goods, and i do perfectlyremember, that it was thy house. i pray thee call to minde, ifeverthou sawest any scarre or marke about her, which may revive thyformer knowledge of her, for my minde perswades me, that the maideis thy daughter.
bernardino musing awhile with himselfe, remembred, that under herleft eare, she had a scarre, in the forme of a little crosse, whichhappened by the byting of a wolfe, and but a small while before thespoyle was made. wherefore, without deferring it to any furthertime, he stept to jacomino who as yet stayed there) and entreatedhim to fetch the mayden from his house, because shee might be knowneto some in the company: whereto right willingly he condiscended, andthere presented the maide before them. so soone as bernardino beheldher, he began to be much inwardly moved, for the perfect characterof her mothers countenance, was really figured in her sweete face;onely that her beauty was somewhat more excelling. yet not herewithsatisfied, he desired jacomino to bee so pleased, as to lift up alittle the lockes of haire, depending over her left eare. jacomino didit presently, albeit with a modest blushing in the maide, andbernardino looking advisedly on it, knew it to be the selfe-samecrosse, which confirmed her constantly to be his daughter.
overcome with excesse of joy, which made the teares to trickle downehis cheekes, he proffered to embrace and kisse the maide: but sherefusing his kindnesse, because (as yet) she knew no reason for it,hee turned himselfe to jacomino, saying. my deare brother andfriend, this maide is my daughter, and my house was the same whichguidotto spoyled, in the generall havocke of our city, and thence hecarried this childe of mine, forgotten (in the fury) by my wife hermother. but happy was the houre of his becomming her father, andcarrying her away with him; for else she had perished in the fire,because the house was instantly burnt downe to the ground. themayden hearing his words, observing him also to be a man of yeeres andgravity: she beleeved what he saide, and humbly submitted her selfe tohis kisses and embraces, even as instructed thereto by instinct ofnature. bernardino instantly sent for his wife, her owne mother, hisdaughters, sonnes, and kindred, who being acquainted with thisadmirable accident, gave her most gracious and kinde welcome, hereceiving her from jacomino as his childe, and the legacies whichguidotto had left her.
when the captaine of the city (being a very wise and worthygentleman) heard these tydings, and knowing that giovanni, then hisprisoner, was the son to bernardino, and naturall brother to the newlyrecovered maide: he bethought himselfe, how best he might qualifie thefault committed by him. and entring into the hall among them,handled the matter so discreetly, that a loving league of peace wasconfirmed betweene giovanni and menghino, to whom (with free andfull consent on all sides) the faire maide, named agatha, was given inmarriage, with a more honourable enlargement of her dowry, andgrinello, with the rest, delivered out of prison, which for theirtumultuous riot they had justly deserved. menghino and agatha hadtheir wedding worthily solemnized, with all due honours belongingthereto; and long time after they had lived in faenza, highly beloved,and graciously esteemed.
the fift day, the sixth novell
wherein is manifested, that love can leade a man into numberlesse
perils: out of which he escapeth with no meane
difficulty.
guion di procida, being found familiarly conversing with a youngdamosell, which he loved; and had beene given (formerly) to frederigo,king of sicilie: was bound to a stake, to be consumed with fire.from which h dan ger (neverthelesse) he escaped, being knowne by donrogiero de oria, lord admirall of sicilie, and afterward married thedamosell.
the novell of madame neiphila being ended, which proved verypleasing to the ladies: the queene commanded madam pampinea, thatshe should prepare to take her turne next, whereto willinglyobeying, thus she began. many and mighty (gracious ladies) are theprevailing powers of love, conducting amorous soules into infinitetravels, with inconveniences no way avoidable, and not easily to beforeseene, or prevented. as partly already hath bene observed, bydivers of our former novels related, and some (no doubt) to ensuehereafter; for one of them (comming now to my memory) i shall acquaintyou withall, in so good tearmes as i can.
ischia is an iland very neere to naples, wherein (not long since)lived a faire and lovely gentlewoman, named restituta, daughter to agentleman of the same isle, whose name was marino bolgaro. a properyouth called guion, dwelling also in a neere neighbouring isle, calledprocida, did love her as dearly as his owne life, and she was asintimately affected towards him. now because the sight of her washis onely comfort, as occasion gave him leave, he resorted to ischiavery often in the day time, and as often also in the night season,when any barke passed from procida to ischia; if to see nothingelse, yet to behold the walles that enclosed his mistresse thus.
while this love continued in equall fervency, it chanced upon afaire summers day, that restituta walked alone upon the sea-shore,going from rocke to rocke, having a naked knife in her hand, wherewithshe opened such oysters as shee found among the stones, seeking forsmall pearles enclosed in their shelles. her walke was very solitaryand shady, with a faire spring or well adjoyning to it, and thither(at that very instant time) certaine sicilian young gentlemen, whichcame from naples, had made their retreate. they perceiving thegentlewoman to be very beautifull (she as yet not having any sightof them) and in such a silent place alone by her selfe: concludedtogether, to make a purchase of her, and carry her thence away withthem; as indeed they did, notwithstanding all her out cryes andexclaimes, bearing her perforce aboard their barke.
setting sayle thence, they arrived in calabria, and then theregrew a great contention betweene them, to which of them this bootyof beauty should belong, because each of them pleaded a title toher. but when they could not grow to any agreement, but doubtedgreater disasters would ensue thereon, by breaking their former leagueof friendship: by an equall conformity in consent, they resolved, tobestow her as a rich present, on frederigo king of sicille, who wasthen young and joviall, and could not be pleased with a better gift;wherefore, they were no sooner landed at palermo, but they didaccording as they had determined. the king did commend her beautyextraordinarily, and liked her farre beyond all his other loves:but, being at that time empaired in his health, and his body muchdistempered by ill dyet; he gave command, that untill he should bein more able disposition, she must be kept in a goodly house of hisowne, erected in a beautifull garden, called the cube, where she wasattended in most pompous manner.now grew the noyse and rumor great in ischia, about this rape orstealing away of restituta; but the chiefest greevance of all, was,that it could not be knowne how, by whom, or by what meanes. but guiondi procida, whom this injury concerned much more then any other: stoodnot in expectation of better tydings from ischia, but h earing whatcourse the barke had taken, made ready another, to follow after withall possible speede. flying thus on the winged winds through the seas,even from minerva, unto the scalea in calabria, searching for his lostlove in every angle: at length it was told him at the scalea, thatshee was carryed away by certaine sicillian marriners, to palermo,whither guion set sayle immediately.
after some diligent search made there, he understood, that she wasdelivered to the king, and he had given strict command, for keepingher in his place of pleasure, called the cube: which newes were nota little greevous to him, for now he was almost quite out of hope, notonely of ever enjoying her, but also of seeing her. neverthelesse,love would not let him utterly despaire, whereupon he sent away hisbarque, and perceiving himselfe to be unknowne of any; he continuedfor some time in palermo, walking many times by that goodly place ofpleasure. it chanced on a day, that keeping his walke as he used todo, fortune was so favourable to him, as to let him have a sight ofher at her window; from whence also she had a full view of him, totheir exceeding comfort and contentment. and guion observing, that thecube was seated in a place of small resort; approached so neere aspossibly he durst, to have some conference with restituta.
as love sets a keene edge on the dullest spirit, and (by a smalladvantage) makes a man the more adventurous: so this little time ofunseene talke, inspired him with courage, and her with witty advice,by what meanes his accesse might be much neerer to her, and theircommunication concealed from any discovery, the scituation of theplace, and benefit of time duly considered. night must be the cloud totheir amorous conclusion, and therefore, so much thereof beingspent, as was thought convenient, he returned thither againe, providedof such grappling-yrons, as is required when men will clamber, madefast unto his hands and knees; by their helpe hee attained to thetop of the wall, whence discending downe into the garden, there hefound the maine yard of a ship, whereof before she had given himinstruction, and rearing it up against her chamber window, made thathis meanes for ascending thereto, she having left it open for hiseasier entrance.
you cannot denie (faire ladies) but here was a very hopefullbeginning, and likely to have as happy an ending, were it not trueloves fatal misery, even in the very height of promised assurance,to be thwarted by unkind prevention, and in such manner as i will tellyou. this night, intended for our lovers meeting, proved disastrousand dreadfull to them both: for the king, who at the first sight ofrestituta, was highly pleased with her excelling beauty; gave order tohis eunuches and other women, that a costly bathe should be preparedfor her, and therein to let her weare away that night, because thenext day he intended to visit her. restituta being royally conductedfrom her chamber to the bathe, attended on with torchlight, as ifshe had bene a queene: none remained there behind, but such women aswaited on her, and the guards without, which watched the chamber.
no sooner was poore guion aloft at the window, calling softly to hismistresse, as if she had bene there; but he was over-heard by thewomen in the darke: and immediately apprehended by the guard, whoforthwith brought him before the lord marshall, where beingexamined, and he avouching, that restituta was his elected wife, andfor her he had presumed in that manner; closely was he kept inprison till the next morning. when he came into the kings presence,and there boldly justified the goodnesse of his cause: restitutalikewise was sent for, who no sooner saw her deare love guion, but sheran and caught him fast about the necke, kissing him in teares, andgreeving not a little at his hard fortune. heereat the king grewexceedingly enraged, loathing and hating her now, much more thenformerly hee did affect her, and having himselfe seene by what strangemeanes he did climbe over the wall, and then mounted to her chamberwindow; he was extreamely impatient, and could not otherwise beeperswaded, but that their meetings thus had bene very many.
forthwith hee sentenced them both with death, commanding, thatthey should be conveyed thence to palermo, and there (being striptstarke naked) be bound to a stake backe to backe, and so to standthe full space of nine houres, to see if any could take knowledge,of whence, or what they were; then afterward, to be consumed withfire. the sentence of death, did not so much daunt or dismay the poorelovers, as the uncivill and unsightly manner, which (in feare of thekings wrathfull displeasure) no man durst presume to contradict.wherefore, as he had commanded, so were they carryed thence topalermo, and bound naked to a stake in the open market place, and(before their eyes) the fire of wood brought, which was to consumethem, according to the houre as the king had appointed. you needenot make any question, what an huge concourse of people were sooneassembled together, to behold such a sad and wofull spectacle, eventhe whole city of palermo, both men and women. the men were strickenwith admiration, beholding the unequalled beauty of faire restituta,and the selfe-same passion possessed the women, seeing guion to besuch a goodly and compleat young man: but the poore infortunate loversthemselves, they stood with their lookes dejected to the ground, beingmuch pittied of all, but no way to be holpen or rescued by any,awaiting when the happy houre would come, to finish both their shameand lives together.
during the time of this tragicall expectation, the fame of thispublike execution being noysed abroade, calling all people farre andneere to behold it; it came to the eare of don rogiero de oria, aman of much admired valour, and then lord high admirall of sicily, whocame himselfe in person, to the place appointed for their death.first, he observed the mayden, confessing her (in his soule) to be abeauty beyond all compare. then looking on the young man, thus hesaide within himselfe: if the inward endowments of the mind, doeparalell the outward perfections of body; the world cannot yeeld amore compleate man. now, as good natures are quickly incited tocompassion (especially in cases almost commanding it) and compassionknocking at the doore of the soule, doth quicken the memory withmany passed recordations: so this noble admirall, advisedly, beholdingpoore condemned guion, conceived, that he had somewhat seene himbefore this instant, and upon this perswasion (even as if divinevertue had tutored his tongue) he saide: is not thy name guion diprocida?
marke now, how quickly misery can receive comfort, upon so poore andsilly a question; for guion began to elevate his dejected countenance,and looking on the admirall, returned him this answer. sir, heretoforei have bene the man which you speake of; but now, both that name andman must die with me. what misfortune (said the admirall) hath thusunkindly crost thee? love (answered guion) and the kingsdispleasure. then the admirall would needs know the whole history atlarge, which briefly was related to him, and having heard how allhad happened; as he was turning his horse to ride away thence, guioncalled to him, saying, good my lord, entreat one favour for me, ifpossibly it may be. what is that? replyed the admirall. you see sir(quoth guior) that i am very shortly to breathe my last; all the gracewhich i do most humbly entreat, is, that as i am here with this chastevirgin, (whom i honour and love beyond my life) and miserably boundbacke to backe: our faces may be turned each to other, to the end,that when the fire shall finish my life, by looking on her, my soulemay take her flight in full felicity. the admirall smiling, said; iwill do for thee what i can, and (perhaps) thou mayest so long lookeon her, as thou wilt be weary, and desire to looke off her.
at his departure, he commanded them that had the charge of thisexecution, to proceede no further, untill they heard more from theking, to whom he gallopped immediately, and although he beheld himto bee very angerly moved; yet he spared not to speake in thismaner. sir, wherin have those poore young couple offended you, thatare so shamefully to be burnt at palermo? the king told him: wheretothe admirall (pursuing still his purpose) thus replyed. beleeve mesir, if true love be an offence, then theirs may be termed to beone; and albeit it deserved death, yet farre be it from thee toinflict it on them: for as faults doe justly require punishment, sodoe good turnes as equally merit grace and requitall. knowest thouwhat and who they are, whom thou hast so dishonourably condemned tothe fire? not i, quoth the king. why then i will tell thee, answeredthe admirall, that thou mayest take the better knowledge of them,and forbeare hereafter, to be so over violently transported withanger.
the young gentleman, is the sonne to landolfo di procida, theonely brother to lord john di procida, by whose meanes thou becamestlord and king of this countrey. the faire young damosell, is thedaughter to marino bulgaro, whose power extendeth so farre, as topreserve thy prerogative in ischia, which (but for him) had long sincebene out-rooted there. beside, these two maine motives, to challengejustly grace and favour from thee; they are in the floure and pride oftheir youth, having long continued in loyall love together, andcompelled by fervency of endeared affection, not any will to displeasethy majesty: they have offended (if it may be termed an offence tolove, and in such lovely young people as they are.) canst thou thenfinde in thine heart to let them die, whom thou rather ought tohonour, and recompence with no meane rewards?when the king had heard this, and beleeved for a certainty, thatthe admirall told him nothing but truth: he appointed not onely,that they should proceede no further, but also was exceedingsorrowfull for what he had done, sending presently to have themreleased from the stake, and honourably to be brought before him.being thus enstructed in their severall qualities, and standing induty obliged, to recompence the wrong which he had done, withrespective honours: he caused them to be cloathed in royallgarments, and knowing them to bee knit in unity of soule; the likehe did by marrying them solemnly together, and bestowing many richgifts and presents on them, sent them honourably attended home toischia; where they were with much joy and comfort received, andlived long after in great felicity.
the fift day, the seventh novell
wherein is declared, the sundry travels and perillous accidents,
occasioned by those two powerfull commanders, love and fortune,
the insulting tyrants over humane life.
theodoro falling in love with violenta, the daughter to hismaster, named amarigo, and she conceiving with child by him; wascondemned to be hanged. as they were leading him to the gallowes,beating and misusing him all the way: he happened to be knowne ofhis owne father, whereupon he was released, and afterward enjoyedviolenta in marriage.
greatly were the ladies minds perplexed, when they heard, that thetwo poore lovers were in danger to be burned: but hearing afterward oftheir happy deliverance, for which they were as joyfull againe; uponthe concluding of the novell, the queene looked on madame lauretta,enjoyning her to tell the next tale, which willingly she undertooke todo, and thus began.
faire ladies, at such time as the good king william reigned insicily, there lived within the same dominion, a young gentleman, namedsignior amarigo, abbot of trapani, who among his other worldlyblessings, (commonly termed the goods of fortune) was notunfurnished of children; and therefore having neede of servants, hemade his provision of them the best he might. at that time, certainegallies of geneway pyrates comming from the easterne parts, whichcoasting along armenia, had taken divers children; he bought some ofthem, thinking that they were turkes. they all resembling clownishpeazants, yet there was one among them, who seemed to be of moretractable and gentle nature, yea, and of a more affable countenancethan any of the rest, being named theodoro: who growing on inyeeres, (albeit he lived in the condition of a servant) was educatedamong amarigoes children, and as enstructed rather by nature, thenaccident, his conditions were very much commended, as also the featureof his body, which proved so highly pleasing to his master amarigo,that he made him a free man, and imagining him to be a turke, causedhim to be baptized, and named pedro, creating him superintendent ofall his affaires, and reposing his-chiefest trust in him.
as the other children of signior amarigo grew in yeeres and stature,so did a daughter of his, named violenta, a very goodly and beautifulldamosell, somewhat over-long kept from marriage by her fatherscovetousnesse, and casting an eye of good liking on poore pedro.now, albeit shee loved him very dearly, and all his behaviour was mostpleasing to her, yet maiden modesty forbad her to reveale it, tilllove (too long concealed) must needes disclose it selfe. which pedroat the length tooke notice of, and grew so forward towards her inequality of affection, as the very sight of her was his onelyhappinesse. yet very fearefull he was, least it should be noted,either by any of the house, or the mayden her selfe: who yet wellobserved it, and to her no meane contentment, as it appeared nolesse (on the other side) to honest pedro.
while thus they loved together meerely in dumbe shewes, not daringto speake to each other, (though nothing more desired) to finde someease in this their oppressing passions: fortune, even as if shepittied their so long languishing, enstructed them how to finde outa way, whereby they might both better releeve themselves. signioramarigo, about some two or three miles distance from trapani, had acountrey-house or farme, whereto his wife, with her daughter andsome other women, used oftentimes to make their resort, as it werein sportfull recreation; pedro alwayes being diligent to man themthither. one time among the rest, it came to passe, as often itfalleth out in the summer season, that the faire skie becamesuddenly over-clouded, even as they were returning home towardstrapani, threatning a storme of raine to overtake them, except theymade the speedier haste.
pedro, who was young, and likewise violenta, went farre more lightlythen her mother and her company, as much perhaps provoked by love,as feare of the sudden raine falling, and paced on so fast beforethem, that they were wholly out of sight. after many flashes oflightning, and a few dreadfull clappes of thunder, there fell such atempestuous showre of hayle, as compelled the mother and her traine toshelter themselves in a poore countrey-mans cottage. pedro andviolenta, having no other refuge, ranne likewise into a pooresheepecoate, so over-ruined, as it was in danger to fall on theirheads; and no body dwelt in it, neither stood any other house neereit, and it was scarsely any shelter for them, howbeit, necessityenforceth to make shift with the meanest. the storme encreasing moreand more, and they coveting to avoyd it as well as they could;sighes and drie hemmes were often inter-vented, as dumbly (before)they were wont to doe, when willingly they could affoord another kindeof speaking.
at last pedro tooke heart, and saide: i would this showre wouldnever cease, that i might be alwayes where i am. the like could iwish, answered violenta, so we were in a better place of safety. thesewishes drew on other gentle language, with modest kisses and embraces,the onely ease to poore lovers soules; so that the raine ceased not,till they had taken order for their oftner conversing, and absoluteplighting of their faiths together. by this time the storme wasfairely over-blowne, and they attending on the way, till the motherand the rest were come, with whom they returned to trapani, where bywise and provident meanes, they often conferred in private together,and enjoyed the benefit of their amorous desires, yet free from anyill surmise or suspition.
but, as lovers felicities are sildome permanent, without oneencountring crosse or other: so these stolne pleasures of pedro andviolenta, met with as sowre a sauce in the farewell. for shee provedto be conceived with childe, then which could befall them no heavieraffliction, and pedro fearing to loose his life therefore,determined immediate right, and revealed his purpose to violenta.which when she heard, she told him plainly, that if he fled,forth-with she would kill her selfe. alas deare love (quoth pedro)with what reason can you wish my tarrying here? this conception ofyours, doth discover our offence, which a fathers pity may easilypardon in vou: but i being his servant and vassall, shall bepunished both for your sinne and mine, because he will have no mercyon me. content thy selfe pedro, replyed violenta, i will take suchorder for mine owne offence, by the discreete counsell of my lovingmother, that no blame shall any way be taide on thee, or so much asa surmise, except thou wilt fondly betray thy selfe. if you can do so,answered pedro, and constantly maintaine your promise; i will notdepart, but see that you prove to bee so good as your word.
violenta, who had concealed her amisse so long as she could, and sawno other remedy, but now at last it must needes be discovered; wentprivately to her mother, and (in teares) revealed her infirmity,humbly craving her pardon, and furtherance in hiding it from herfather. the mother being extraordinarily displeased, chiding herwith many sharpe and angry speeches, would needes know with whomshee had thus offended. the daughter (to keepe pedro from anydetection) forged a tale of her owne braine, farre from any truthindeede, which her mother verily beleeving, and willing to preserveher daughter from shame, as also the fierce anger of her husband, hebeing a man of very implacable nature: conveyed her to the countreyfarme, whither signior amarigo sildome or never resorted, intending(under the shadow of sicknesse) to let her lye in there, without theleast suspition of any in trapani.
sinne and shame can never be so closely carryed, or clouded with thegreatest cunning; but truth hath a loop-light whereby to discoverit, even when it supposeth it selfe in the surest safety. for, onthe very day of her detiverance, at such time as the mother, andsome few friends (sworne to secrecy) were about the businesse, signioramarigo, having beene in company of other gentlemen, to flye his hawkeat the river, upon a sudden, (but very unfortunately, albeit hee wasalone by himselfe) stept into his farm-house, even to the next roomewhere the women were, and heard the newborne babe to cry, whereatmarvelling not a little, he called for his wife, to know what youngchilde cryed in his house. the mother, amazed at his strange commingthither, which never before he had used to doe, and pittying thewofull distresse of her daughter, which now could bee no longercovered, revealed what happened to violenta. but he, being nothingso rash in beliefe, as his wife was, made answere, that it wasimpossible for his daughter to be conceived with childe, because henever observed the least signe of love in her to any man whatsoever,and therefore he would be satisfied in the truth, as shee expected anyfavour from him, or else there was no other way but death.
the mother laboured by all meanes she could devise, to pacifie herhusbands fury, which proved all in vaine; for being thus impatientlyincensed, he drew foorth his sword, and stepping with it drawne intothe chamber (where she had bene delivered of a goodly sonne) he saidunto her. either tell me who is the father of this bastard, or thouand it shall perish both together. poore violenta, lesse respectingher owne life, then she did the childes; forgot her solemne promisemade to pedro, and discovered all. which when amarigo had heard, hegrew so desperately enraged, that hardly he could forbeare fromkilling her. but after hee had spoken what his fury enstructed him,hee mounted on horsebacke againe, ryding backe to trapani, where heedisclosed the injury which pedro had done him, to a noble gentleman,named signior conrado, who was captaine for the king over the city.
before poore pedro could have any intelligence, or so much assuspected any treachery against him; he was suddenly apprehended,and being called in question, stood not on any deniall, butconfessed truly what hee had done: whereupon, within some few dayesafter, he was condemned by the captaine, to be whipt to the place ofexecution, and afterward to be hanged by the necke. signior amarigo,because he would cut off (at one and the same time) not onely thelives of the two poore lovers, but their childes also; as afranticke man, violently carried from all sense of compassion, evenwhen pedro was led and whipt to his death: he mingled strong poyson ina cup of wine, delivering it to a trusty servant of his owne, and anaked rapier withall, speaking to him in this manner. goe carrythese two presents to my late daughter violenta, and tell her from me,that in this instant houre, two severall kinds of death are offeredunto her, and one of them she must make choyce of, either to drinkethe poyson, and so dye, or to run her body on this rapiers point,which if she denie to doe, she shall be haled to the publike marketplace, and presently be burned in the sight of her lewd companion,according as shee hath worthily deserved. when thou hast delivered herthis message, take he- bastard brat, so lately since borne, and dashhis braines out against the walles, and afterward throw him to mydogges to feede on.
when the father had given this cruell sentence, both against hisowne daughter, and her young sonne, the servant readier to do evill,then any good, went to the place where his daughter was kept. poorecondemned pedro, (as you have heard) was led whipt to the gibbet,and passing (as it pleased the captaines officers to guide him) by afaire inne: at the same time were lodged there three chiefe persons ofarminia, whom the king of the countrey had sent to rome, asambassadours to the popes holinesse, to negociate about an importantbusinesse neerely concerning the king and state. reposing there forsome few dayes, as being much wearied with their journey., andhighly honoured by the gentlemen of trapani, especially signioramarigo; these ambassadours standing in their chamber window, heardthe wofull lamentations of pedro in his passage by.
pedro was naked from the middle upward, and his hands bound fastbehind him, but being well observed by one of the ambassadours, aman aged, and of great authority, named phinio: hee espied a great redspot upon his breast, not painted, or procured by his punishment,but naturally imprinted in the flesh, which women (in these parts)terme the rose. upon the sight hereof, he suddenly remembred a sonneof his owne, which was stolne from him about fifteene yeeres before,by pyrates on the sea-coast of laiazzo, never hearing any tydings ofhim afterward. upon further consideration, and comparing his sonnesage with the likelyhood of this poore wretched mans; thus he conferredwith his owne thoughts. if my sonne (quoth he) be living, his age isequall to this mans time, and by the red blemish on his breast, itplainely speakes him for to bee my sonne.
moreover, thus he conceived, that if it were he, he could not butremember his owne name, his fathers, and the armenian language;wherefore, when he was just opposite before the window, hee calledaloud to him, saying: theodoro. pedro hearing the voyce, presentlylifted up his head, and phinio speaking armenian, saide: of whence artthou, and what is thy fathers name? the sergeants (in reverence to thelord ambassador) stayed awhile, till pedro had returned his answer,who saide. i am an armenian borne, sonne to one phineo, and wasbrought hither i cannot tell by whom. phineo hearing this, knew thenassuredly, that this was the same sonne which he had lost;wherefore, the teares standing in his eyes with conceite of joy, downehe descended from the window, and the other ambassadors with him,running in among the sergeants to embrace his sonne, and casting hisowne rich cloake about his whipt body, entreating them to forbeare andproceed no further, till they heard what command he should returnewithall unto them; which very willingly they promised to do.
already, by the generall rumour dispersed abroad, phineo hadunderstood the occasion, why pedro was thus punished, and sentenced tobee hanged: wherefore, accompanied with his fellow ambassadors, andall their attending traine, he went to signior conrado, and spake thusto him. my lord, he whom you have sent to death as a slave, is afree gentleman borne, and my sonne, able to make her amends whom hehath dishonoured, by taking her in marriage as his lawfull wife. letme therefore entreat you, to make stay of the execution, ill it may beknowne, whether she will accept him as her husband, or no; least (ifshe be so pleased) you offend directly against your owne law. whensignior conrado heard, that pedro was sonne to the lord ambassador, hewondred thereat not a little, and being somewhat ashamed of hisfortunes errour, confessed, that the claime of phineo wascomformable to law, and ought not to be denied him; going presently tothe counsell chamber, sending for signior amarigo immediately thither,and acquainting him fully with the case.
amarigo, who beleeved that his daughter and her child were alreadydead, was the wofullest man in the world, for his so rashproceeding, knowing very well, that if she were not dead, the scandallwould easily be wipt away with credit. wherefore he sent in allpoast haste, to the place where his daughter lay, that if hiscommand were not already executed, by no meanes to have it done atall. he who went on this speedy errand, found there signioramarigoes servant standing before violenta, with the cup of poysonin the one hand, and the drawne rapier in the other, reproaching herwith very foule and injurious speeches, because she had delayed thetime so long, and would not accept the one or other, striving (byviolence) to make her take the one. but hearing his masters command tothe contrary, he left her, and returned backe to him, certifying himhow the case stood.
most highly pleased was amarigo with these glad newes, and goingto the ambassadour phineo, in teares excused himselfe (so well as hecould) for his severity, and craving pardon; assured him, that iftheodoro would accept his daughter in marriage, willingly he wouldbestow her on him. phineo allowed his excuses to be tollerable, andsaide beside; if my son will not marry your daughter, then let thesentence of death be executed on him. amarigo and phineo being thusaccorded, they went to poore theodoro, fearefully looking every minutewhen he should dye, yet joyfull that he had found his father, whopresently moved the question to him. theodoro hearing that violentashould bee his wife, if he would so accept her: was over come withsuch exceeding joy, as if he had leapt out of hell into paradise;confessing, that no greater felicity could befall him, if violenta herselfe were so well pleased as he.
the like motion was made to her, to understand her disposition inthis case, who hearing what good hap had befalne theodoro, and nowin like manner must happen to her: whereas not long before, when twosuch violent deathes were prepared for her, and one of them sheemust needs embrace, she accounted her misery beyond all otherwomens, but she now thought her selfe above all in happinesse, ifshe might be wife to her beloved theodoro, submitting her selfewholy to her fathers disposing. the marriage being agreed onbetweene them, it was celebrated with great pompe and solemnity, agenerall feast being made for all the citizens, and the youngmarried couple nourished up their sweete son, which grew to be avery comely childe.
after that the embassie was dispatched at rome, and phineo (with therest) was returned thither againe; violenta did reverence him as herowne naturall father, and he was not a little proud of so lovely adaughter, beginning a fresh feasting againe, and continuing the same awhole moneth together. within some short while after, a galley beingfairely furnished for the purpose, phineo, his sonne, daughter, andtheir young sonne, went aboard, sayling away thence to laiazzo,where afterward they lived in much tranquility.
the fift day, the eighth novell
declaring, that love not onely makes a man prodigall, but also an
enemy to himselfe. moreover, adventure oftentimes bringeth such
matters to passe, as wit and cunning in man
can ever comprehend
anastasio, a gentleman of the family of the honesti, by loving thedaughter to signior paulo traversario, lavishly wasted a great part ofhis substance, without receiving any love from her againe. byperswasion of some of his kindred and friends, he went to a countreydwelling of his, called chiasso, where he saw a knight desperatelypursue a young damosell; whom he slew, and afterward gave her to bedevoured by his hounds. anastasio invited his friends, and hers alsowhom he so dearely loved, to take part of a dinner with him, wholikewise saw the same damosell so torne in peeces: which his unkindlove perceiving, and fearing least the like ill fortune shouldhappen to her; she accepted anastasio to be her husband.
so soone as madam lauretta held her peace, madam pampinea (by thequeenes command) began, and said. lovely ladies, as pitty is mosthighly commended in our sexe, even so is cruelty in us as severelyrevenged (oftentimes) by divine ordination. which that you may thebetter know, and learne likewise to shun, as a deadly evill; i purposeto make apparant by a novell, no lesse full of compassion, thendelectable.
ravenna being a very ancient city in romania, there dwelt sometime agreat number of worthy gentlemen, among whom i am to speake of onemore especially, named anastasio, descended from the family of thehonesti, who by the death of his father, and an unckle of his, wasleft extraordinarily abounding in riches, and growing to yearesfitting for marriage, (as young gallants are easily apt enough todo) he became enamored of a very bountifull gentlewoman, who wasdaughter to signior paulo traversario, one of the most ancient andnoble families in all the countrey. nor made he any doubt, but byhis meanes and industrious endeavour, to derive affection from heragaine; for he carried himselfe like a brave-minded gentleman,liberall in his expences, honest and affable in all his actions, whichcommonly are the true notes of a good nature, and highly to becommended in any man. but, howsoever fortune became his enemy, theselaudable parts of manhood did not any way friend him, but ratherappeared hurtfull to himselfe: so cruell, unkind, and almost meerelysavage did she shew her selfe to him; perhaps in pride of her singularbeauty, or presuming on her nobility by birth, both which are ratherblemishes, then ornaments in a woman, especially when they be abused.
the harsh and uncivill usage in her, grew very distastefull toanastasio, and so unsufferable, that after a long time of fruitlesseservice, requited still with nothing but coy disdaine; desperateresolutions entred into his brain, and often he was minded to killhimselfe. but better thoughts supplanting those furious passions, heabstained from any such violent act; and governed by more manlyconsideration, determined, that as shee hated him, he would requiteher with the like, if he could: wherein he became altogether deceived,because as his hopes grew to a dayly decaying, yet his love enlargedit selfe more and more.
thus anastasio persevering still in his bootlesse affection, and hisexpences not limited within any compasse; it appeared in the judgementof his kindred and friends, that he was falne into a mightyconsumption, both of his body and meanes. in which respect, many timesthey advised him to leave the city of ravenna, and live in someother place for such a while; as might set a more moderate stintupon his spendings, and bridle the indiscreete course of his love, theonely fuell which fed this furious fire.
anastasio held out thus a long time, without lending an eare to suchfriendly counsell: but in the end, he was so neerely followed by them,as being no longer able to deny them, he promised to accomplishtheir request. whereupon, making such extraordinary preparation, as ifhe were to set thence for france or spaine, or else into somefurther distant countrey: he mounted on horsebacke, and accompaniedwith some few of his familiar friends, departed from ravenna, and rodeto a countrey dwelling house of his owne, about three or foure milesdistant from the cittie which was called chiasso, and there (upon avery goodly greene) erecting divers tents and pavillions, such asgreat persons make use of in the time of a progresse: he said to hisfriends, which came with him thither, that there he determined to makehis abiding, they all returning backe unto ravenna, and might cometo visite him againe so often as they pleased.
now, it came to passe, that about the beginning of may, it beingthen a very milde and serrene season, and he leading there a much moremagnificent life, then ever hee had done before, inviting divers todine with him this day, and as many to morrow, and not to leave himtill after supper: upon the sodaine, falling into remembrance of hiscruell mistris, hee commanded all his servants to forbeare hiscompany, and suffer him to walke alone by himselfe awhile, becausehe had occasion of private meditations, wherein he would not (by anymeanes) be troubled. it was then about the ninth houre of the day, andhe walking on solitary all alone, having gone some halfe milesdistance from his tents, entred into a grove of pine-trees, neverminding dinner time, or any thing else, but onely the unkind requitallof his love.
sodainly he heard the voice of a woman, seeming to make mostmournfull complaints, which breaking off his silent considerations,made him to lift up his head, to know the reason of this noise. whenhe saw himselfe so farre entred into the grove, before he couldimagine where he was; hee looked amazedly round about him, and outof a little thicket of bushes and briars round engirt with spreadingtrees, hee espyed a young damosell come running towards him, nakedfrom the middle upward, her haire dishevelled on her shoulders, andher faire skinne rent and torne with the briars and brambles, sothat the blood ran trickling downe mainely; she weeping, wringingher hands, and crying out for mercy so lowde as she could. twofierce bloodhounds also followed swiftly after, and where theirteeth tooke hold, did most cruelly bite her. last of all (mounted on alusty blacke courser) came gallopping a knight, with a very sterne andangry countenance, holding a drawne short sword in his hand, givingher very vile and dreadfull speeches, and threatning every minute tokill her.
this strange and uncouth sight, bred in him no meane admiration,as also kinde compassion to the unfortunate woman; out of whichcompassion, sprung an earnest desire, to deliver her (if he could)from a death so full of anguish and horror: but seeing himselfe tobe without armes, he ran and pluckt up the plant of a tree, whichhandling as if it had bene a staffe, he opposed himselfe against thedogges and the knight, who seeing him comming, cryed out in thismanner to him. anastasio, put not thy selfe in any opposition, butreferre to my hounds and me, to punish this wicked woman as she hathjustly deserved. and in speaking these words, the hounds tooke fasthold on her body, so staying her, untill the knight was come neerer toher, and alighted from his horse: when anastasio (after some otherangry speeches) spake thus unto him: i cannot tell what or who thouart, albeit thou takest such knowledge of me, yet i must say, thatit is meere cowardize in a knight, being armed as thou art, to offerto kill a naked woman, and make thy dogges thus to seize on her, as ifshe were a savage beast; therefore beleeve me, i will defend her sofarre as i am able.
anastasio, answered the knight, i am of the same city as thou art,and do well remember, that thou wast a little ladde, when i (who wasthen named guido anastasio, and thine unckle) became as intirely inlove with this woman, as now thou art of paulo traversarioes daughter.but through her coy disdaine and cruelty, such was my heavy fate, thatdesperately i slew my selfe with this short sword which thou beholdestin mine hand: for which rash sinfull deede, i was, and am condemned toeternall punishment. this wicked woman, rejoycing immeasurably in mineunhappy death, remained no long time alive after me, and for hermercilesse sinne of cruelty, and taking pleasure in my oppressingtorments; dying unrepentant, and in pride of her scorne, she had thelike sentence of condemnation pronounced on her, and sent to thesame place where i was tormented.
there the three impartiall judges, imposed this further inflictionon us both; namely, that she should flye in this manner before me, andi (who loved her so deerely while i lived) must pursue her as mydeadly enemy, not like a woman that had a taste of love in her. and sooften as i can overtake her, i am to kill her with this sword, thesame weapon wherewith i slew my selfe. then am i enjoyned, therewithto open her accursed body, and teare out her hard and frozen heart,with her other inwards, as now thou seest me doe, which i give unto myhounds to feede on. afterward, such is the appointment of the supreamepowers, that she re-assumeth life againe, even as if she had notbene dead at all, and falling to the same kinde of flight, i with myhounds am still to follow her; without any respite or intermission.every friday, and just at this houre, our course is this way, whereshe suffereth the just punishment inflicted on her. nor do we rest anyof the other dayes, but are appointed unto other places, where shecruelly executed her malice against me, being now (of her deareaffectionate friend) ordained to be her endlesse enemy, and topursue her in this manner for so many yeares, as she exercised monethsof cruelty, towards me. hinder me not then, in being the executionerof divine justice; for all thy interposition is but in vaine, inseeking to crosse the appointment of supreame powers.
anastasio having attentively heard all this discourse, his hairestood upright like porcupines quils, and his soule was so shakenwith the terror, that he stept backe to suffer the knight to do whathe was enjoyned, looking yet with milde commisseration on the poorewoman. who kneeling most humbly before the knight, and stearnelyseized on by the two blood-hounds, he opened her brest with hisweapon, drawing foorth her heart and bowels, which instantly hethrew to the dogges, and they devoured them very greedily. sooneafter, the damosell (as if none of this punishment had beneinflicted on her) started up sodainly, running amaine towards thesea shore, and the hounds swiftly following her, as the knight did thelike, after he had taken his sword, and was mounted on horsebacke;so that anastasio had soone lost all sight of them, and could notgesse what was become of them.
after he had heard and observed all these things, he stoode awhile as confounded with feare and pitty, like a simple silly man,hoodwinkt with his owne passions, not knowing the subtle enemiescunning illusions in offering false suggestions to the sight, to workehis owne ends thereby, and encrease the number of his deceivedservants. forthwith he perswaded himselfe, that he might make good useof this womans tormenting, so justly imposed on the knight toprosecute, if thus it should continue still every friday. wherefore,setting a good note or marke upon the place, he returned backe tohis owne people, and at such time as he thought convenient, sent fordivers of his kindred and friends from ravenna, who being present withhim, thus he spake to them.
deare kinsmen and friends, ye have a long while importuned me, todiscontinue my over-doating love to her, whom you all thinke, and ifind to be my mortall enemy: as also, to give over my lavish expences,wherein i confesse my selfe too prodigall; both which requests ofyours, i will condiscend to, provided, that you will performe onegracious favour for me; namely, that on friday next, signior paulotraversario, his wife, daughter, with all other women linked in linageto them, and such beside onely as you shall please to appoint, willvouchsafe to accept a dinner heere with wi me; as for the reasonthereto mooving me, you shall then more at large be acquaintedwithall. this appeared no difficult matter for them to accomplish:wherefore, being returned to ravenna, and as they found the timeanswerable to their purpose, they invited such as anastasio hadappointed them. and although they found it some-what an hard matter,to gaine her company whom he so deerely affected; yet notwithstanding,the other women won her along with them.
a most magnificent dinner had anastasio provided, and the tableswere covered under the pine-trees, where he saw the cruell lady sopursued and slaine: directing the guests so in their seating, that theyong gentlewoman his unkinde mistresse, sate with her face oppositeunto the place, where the dismall spectacle was to be seene. about theclosing up of dinner, they beganne to heare the noise of the pooreprosecuted woman, which drove them all to much admiration; desiring toknow what it was, and no one resolving them, they arose from thetables, and looking directly as the noise came to them, they espyedthe wofull woman, the dogges eagerly pursuing her; and the armedknight on horsebacke, gallopping fiercely after them with his drawneweapon, and came very nere unto the company, who cryed out with lowdexclaimes against the dogs and the knight, stepping forth inassistance of the injured woman.
the knight spake unto them, as formerly he had done to anastasio,(which made them draw backe, possessed with feare and admiration)acting the same cruelty as he did the friday before, not differingin the least degree. most of the gentlewomen there present, beingneere allyed to the unfortunate woman, and likewise to the knight,remembring well both his love and death, did shed teares asplentifully, as if it had bin to the very persons themselves, inusuall performance of the action indeede. which tragicall sceene beingpassed over, and the woman and knight gone out of their sight: allthat had seene this straunge accident, fell into diversity of confusedopinions, yet not daring to disclose them, as doubting some furtherdanger to ensue thereon.
but beyond all the rest, none could compare in feare andastonishment with the cruell yong maide affected by anastasio, whoboth saw and observed all with a more inward apprehension, knowingvery well, that the morall of this dismall spectacle, carried a muchneerer application to her then any other in all the company. for nowshe could call to mind, how unkinde and cruell she had shewne herselfe to anastasio, even as the other gentlewoman formerly did toher lover, still flying from him in great contempt and scorne: forwhich, she thought the blood-hounds also pursued her at the heelesalready, and a sword of vengeance to mangle her body. this fearegrew so powerfull in her, that to prevent the like heavy doome fromfalling on her, she studied (by all her best and commendable meanes,and therein bestowed all the night season) how to change her hatredinto kinde love, which at the length she fully obtained, and thenpurposed to prosecute in this manner.
secretly she sent a faithfull chambermaide of her owne, to greeteanastasio on her behalfe; humbly entreating him te come see her:because now she was absolutely determined, to give him satisfaction inall which (with honour) he could request of her. whereto anastasioanswered, that he accepted her message thankfully, and desired noother favour at her hand, but that which stood with her owne offer,namely, to be his wife in honourable marriage, the maide knowingsufficiently, that he could not be more desirous of the match, thenher mistresse shewed her selfe to be, made answer in her name, thatthis motion would be most welcome to her.
heereupon, the gentlewoman her selfe, became the solicitour to herfather and mother, telling them plainly, that slie was willing to bethe wife of anastasio: which newes did so highly content them, thatupon the sunday next following, the marriage was very worthilysolemnized, and they lived and loved together very kindly. thus thedivine bounty out of the malignant enemies secret machinations, cancause good effects to arise and succeede. for, from this conceite offearfull imagination in her, not onely happened this long desiredconversion, of a maide so obstinately scornfull and proud; butlikewise all the women of ravenna (being admonished by her example)grew afterward more kind and tractable to mens honest motions, thenever they shewed themselves before. and let me make some use hereof(faire ladies) to you, not to stand over-nicely conceited of yourbeauty and good parts, when men (growing enamored of you by them)solicite you with their best and humblest services. remember then thisdisdainfull gentlewoman, but more especially her, who being thedeath of so kinde a lover, was therefore condemned to perpetuallpunishment, and he made the minister thereof, whom she had cast offwith coy disdaine, from which i wish your minds to be as free, as mineis ready to do you any acceptable service.
the fift day, the ninth novell
wherein is figured to the life, the notable kindnesse and
courtesie, of a true and constant lover: as also the
magnanimous minde of a famous lady
frederigo, of the alberighi family, loved a gentlewoman, and was notrequited with like love againe. by bountifull expences, and overliberall invitations, he wasted and consumed all his lands andgoods, having nothing left him, but a hawke or faulcon. his unkindemistresse happeneth to come visite him, and he not having any otherfoode for her dinner; made a dainty dish of his faulcone for her tofeede on. being conquered by this exceeding kinde courtesie; shechanged her former hatred towardes him, accepting him as her husbandin marriage, and made him a man of wealthy possessions.
madam philomena having finished her discourse, the queeneperceiving, that her turne was the next, in regard of the priviledgegranted to dioneus; with a smiling countenance thus she spake. nowor never am i to maintaine the order which was instituted when weebegan this commendable exercise, whereto i yeeld with all humbleobedience. and (worthy ladies) i am to acquaint you with a novell,in some sort answerable to the precedent, not onely to let you know,how powerfully your kindnesses do prevalle, in such as have a free andgentle soule: but also to dvise you, in being bountifull, where vertuedoth justly challenge it. and evermore, let your favours shine onworthy deservers, without the direction of chaunce or fortune, whonever bestoweth any gift by discretion; but rashly withoutconsideration, even to the first she blindly meets withall.
you are to understand then, that coppo di borghese domenichi, whowas of our owne city, and perhaps (as yet) his name remaineth in greatand reverend authority, now in these dayes of ours, as welldeserving eternall memory; yet more for his vertues and commendablequalities, then any boast of nobility from his predecessors. this man,being well entred into yeares, and drawing towards the finishing ofhis dayes; it was his only delight and felicity, in conversation amonghis neighbours, to talke of matters concerning antiquity, and someother things within compasse of his owne knowledge: which he woulddeliver in such singular order (having an absolute memory) and withthe best language, as very few or none could do the like. among themultiplicity of his queint discourses, i remember he told us, thatsometime there lived in florence a yong gentleman, named frederigo,sonne to signior phillippo alberigo, who was held and reputed, bothfor armes, and all other actions beseeming a gentleman, hardly to havehis equall through all tuscany.
this frederigo (as it is no rare matter in yong gentlemen) becameenamored of a gentlewoman, named madam giana, who was esteemed (in hertime) to be the fairest and most gracious lady in all florence. inwhich respect, and to reach the height of his desire, he made manysumptuous feasts and banquets, joustes, tilties, tournaments, andall other noble actions of armes, beside, sending her infinite richand costly presents, making spare of nothing, but lashing all out inlavish expence. notwithstanding, she being no lesse honest then faire,made no reckoning of whatsoever he did for her sake, or the leastrespect of his owne person. so that frederigo, spending thus dailymore, then his meanes and ability could maintaine, and no supplies anyway redounding to him, or his faculties (as very easily they might)diminished in such sort, that became so poore; as he had nothingleft him, but a small poore farme to live upon, the silly reveneweswhereof were so meane, as scarcely allowed him meat and drinke; yethad he a faire hawke or faulcon, hardly any where to be fellowed, soexpeditious and sure she was of flight. his low ebbe and poverty, noway quailing his love to the lady, but rather setting a keener edgethereon; he saw the city life could no longer containe him, where mosthe coveted to abide: and therefore, betooke himselfe to his poorecountrey farme, to let his faulcon get him his dinner and supper,patiently supporting his penurious estate, without suite or meanesmaking to one, for helpe or reliefe in any such necessity.
while thus he continued in this extremity, it came to passe, thatthe husband to madam giana fell sicke, and his debility of bodybeing such, as little, or no hope of life remained: he made his lastwill and testament, ordaining thereby, that his sonne (alreadygrowne to indifferent stature) should be heire to all his lands andriches, wherein he abounded very greatly. next unto him, if he chancedto die without a lawfull heire, he substituted his wife, whom mostdearely he affected, and so departed out of this life. madam gianabeing thus left a widdow; as commonly it is the custome of our citydames, during the summer season, she went to a house of her owne inthe countrey, which was somewhat neere to poore frederigoes farme, andwhere he lived in such an honest kind of contented poverty.
hereupon, the young gentleman her sonne, taking great delight inhounds and hawkes; grew into familiarity with poore frederigo, andhaving seene many faire flights of his faulcon, they pleased him soextraordinarily, that he earnestly desired to enjoy her as his owne;yet durst not move the motion for her, because he saw how choycelyfrederigo esteemed her. within a short while after, the younggentleman, became very sicke, whereat his mother greevedexceedingly, (as having no more but he, and therefore loved him themore entirely) never parting from him night or day, comforting himso kindly as she could, and demanding, if he had a desire to anything, willing him to reveale it, and assuring him withall, that (itwere within the compasse of possibility) he should have it. theyouth hearing how many times she had made him these offers, and withsuch vehement protestations of performance, at last thus spake.
mother (quoth he) if you can do so much for me, as that i may havefrederigoes faulcon, i am perswaded, that my sicknesse soone willcease. the lady hearing this, sate some short while musing to herselfe, and began to consider, what she might best doe to compasseher sonnes desire: for well she knew, how long a time frederigo hadmost lovingly kept it, not suffering it ever to be out of his sight.moreover, shee remembred, how earnest in affection he had bene to her,never thinking himselfe happy, but onely when he was in her company;wherefore, shee entred into this private consultation with her ownethoughts. shall i send, or goe my selfe in person, to request thefaulcon of him, it being the best that ever flew? it is his onelyjewell of delight, and that taken from him, no longer can he wish tolive in this world. how farre then voyde of understanding shall i shewmy selfe, to rob a gentleman of his sole felicity, having no other joyor comfort left him? these and the like considerations, wheeledabout her troubled braine, onely in tender care and love to her sonne,perswading her selfe assuredly, that the faulcon were her owne, if shewould but request it: yet not knowing whereon it were best to resolve,shee returned no answer to her sonne, but sate still in her silentmeditations. at the length, love to the youth, so prevailed withher, that she concluded on his contentation, and (come of it whatcould) shee would not send for it; but go her selfe in person torequest it, and then returne home againe with it: whereupon thus shespake. sonne, comfort thy selfe, and let languishing thoughts nolonger offend thee: for here i promise thee, that the first thing i doto morrow morning, shall bee my journey for the faulcon, and assurethy selfe, that i will bring it with me. whereat the youth was sojoyed, that he imagined, his sicknesse began instantly a little toleave him, and promised him a speedy recovery.
somewhat early the next morning, the lady, in care of her sicke sonshealth, was up and ready betimes, and taking another gentlewomanwith her; onely as a morning recreation, shee walked to frederigoespoore countrey farme, knowing that it would not a little glad him tosee her. at the time of her arrivall there, he was (by chance) in asilly garden, on the backe-side of the a si house, because (as yet) itwas no convenient time for flight: but when he heard, that madam glanawas come thither, and desired to have some conference with him; as onealmost confounded with admiration, in all hast he ran to her, andsaluted her with most humble reverence. she in all modest and graciousmanner, requited him with the like salutations, thus speaking tohim. signior frederigo, your owne best wishes befriend you, i am nowcome hither, to recompence some part of your passed travailes, whichheretofore you pretended traval i to suffer for my sake, when yourlove was more to me, then did well become you to offer, or my selfe toaccept. and such is the nature of my recompence, that i make myselfe your guest, and meane this day to dine with as also thisgentlewoman, making no doubt of our welcome: whereto, with lowlyreverence, thus he replyed.
madam, i doe not remember, that ever i sustained any losse orhinderance by you, but rather so much good, as if i was worth anything, it proceeded from your great deservings, and by the servicein which i did stand engaged to you. but my present happinesse canno way be equalled, derived from your super-abounding gracious favour,and more then common course of kindnesse, vouchsafing (of your owneliberall nature) to come and visit so poore a servant. oh that i hadas much to spend againe, as heretofore riotously i have runnethorow: what a welcome would your poore host bestow upon you, forgracing; this homely house with your divine presence? with thesewordes, he conducted her into his house, and then into his simplegarden, where having no convenient company for her, he said. madam,the poverty of this place is such, that it affoordeth none fit foryour conversation: this poore woman, wife to an honest husbandman willattend on you, while i (with some speede) shall make ready dinner.
poore frederigo, although his necessity was extreame, and his greefegreat, remembring his former inordinate expences, a moity whereofwould now have stood him in some stead; yet he had a heart as free andforward as ever, not a jotte dejected in his minde, though utterlyoverthrowne by fortune. alas! how was his good soule afflicted, thathe had nothing wherewith to honour his lady? up and downe he runnes,one while this way, then againe another, exclaiming on hisdisastrous fate, like a man enraged, or bereft of senses: for he hadnot one peny of mony neither pawne or pledge, wherewith to procureany. the time hasted on, and he would gladly (though in meane measure)expresse his honourable respect of the lady. to begge of any, hisnature denied it, and to borrow he could not, because his neighbourswere all as needie as himselfe.
at last, looking round about, and seeing his faulcon standing on herpearch, which he felt to be very plumpe and fat, being voyde of allother helpes in his neede, and thinking her to be a fowle meete for sonoble a lady to feede on: without any further demurring or delay, hepluckt off her necke, and caused the poore woman presently to pull herfeathers: which being done, he put her on the spit, and in shorttime she was daintily roasted. himselfe covered the table, set breadand salt on and laid the napkins, whereof he had but a few left him.going then with chearfull lookes into the garden, telling the ladythat dinner was ready, and nothing now wanted, but her presence. shee,and the gentlewoman went in, and being sated at the table, not knowingwhat they fed on, the faulcon was all their foode; and frederigo not alittle joyfull, that his credite was so well saved. when they wererisen from the table, and had spent some small time in familiarconference: the lady thought it fit, to acquaint him with the reasonof her comming thither, and therefore (in very kinde manner) thusbegan.
frederigo, if you do yet remember your former carriage towardsmee, as also my many modest and chaste denials, which (perhaps) youthought to savour of a harsh, cruell, and un-womanly nature, i make nodoubt, but you will wonder at my present presumption, when youunderstand the occasion, which expressely mooved me to come hither.but if you were possessed of children, or ever had any, whereby youmight comprehend what love (in nature) is due unto them: then idurst assure my selfe, that you would partly hold me excused.
now, in regard that you never had any, and my selfe (for my part)have but onely one, i stand not exempted from those lawes, which arein common to other mothers. and being compelled to obey the power ofthose lawes; contrary to mine owne will, and those duties which reasonowne wi ought to maintaine, i am to request such a gift of you,which i am certaine, that you do make most precious account of, asin manly equity you can do no lesse. for fortune hath bin so extreamlyadverse to you, that she hath robbed you of all other pleasures,allowing you no comfort or delight, but onely that poore one, which isyour faire faulcone. of which bird, my sonne is become so strangelydesirous, as, if i doe not bring it to him at my comming home; i feareso much, the extreamity of his sicknesse, as nothing can ensuethereon, but his losse of life. wherefore i beseech you, not in regardof the love you have borne me, for therby you stand no way obliged:but in your owne true gentle nature (the which hath alwayes declaredit selfe ready in you, to do more kinde offices generally, then anyother gentleman that i know) you will be pleased to give her me, or atthe least, let me buy her of you.
which if you do, i shall freely then confesse, that onely by yourmeanes, my sonnes life is saved, and we both shall for ever remaineengaged to you.
when frederigo had heard the ladies request, which was now quite outof his power to graunt, because it had bene her service at dinner:he stood like a man meerely dulled in his sences, the teares tricklingamaine downe his cheekes, and he not able to utter one word. which sheperceiving, began to conjecture immediately, that these teares andpassions proceeded rather from greefe of minde, as being loather topart with his faulcon, then any other kinde of manner: which madeher ready to say, that she would not have it. neverthelesse she didnot speake, but rather tarried to attend his answer. which, after somesmall respite and pause, he returned in this manner.
madame, since the houre, when first mine affection became solydevoted to your service; fortune hath bene crosse and contrary tome, in many occasions, as justly, and in good reason i may complain ofher, yet all seemed light and easie to be indured, in comparison ofher present malicious contradiction, to my utter overthrow, andperpetuall mollestation. considering, that you are come hither to mypoore house, which (while i was rich and able) you would not so muchas vouchsafe to looke on. and now you have requested a small matter ofme, wherein she hath also most crookedly thwarted me, because she hathdisabled me, in bestowing so meane a gift, as your selfe willconfesse, when it shall be related to you in few words.
so soone as i heard, that it was your gracious pleasure to dine withme, having regard to your excellency, and what (by merit) is justlydue unto you: i thought it a part of my bounden duty, to entertaineyou with such exquisite viands, as my poore power could any waycompasse, and farre beyond respect or welcome, to other common andordinary persons. whereupon, remembring my faulcon, which now you askefor; and her goodnesse, excelling all other of her kinde; isupposed, that she would make a dainty dish for your dyet, andhaving drest her, so well as i could devise to do: you have fedheartily on her, and i am proud that i have so well bestowne her.but perceiving now, that you would have her for your sicke sonne; itis no meane affliction to me, that i am disabled of yeelding youcontentment, which all my life time i have desired to doe.
to approve his words, the feathers, feete, and beake were broughtin, which when she saw, she greatly blamed him for killing so rare afaulcon, to content the appetite of any woman whatsoever. yet shecommended his height of spirit, which poverty had no power to abase.lastly, her hopes being frustrate for enjoying the faulcon, andfearing besides the health of her sonne, she thanked frederigo for hishonorable kindnesse, returning home againe sad and melancholly.shortly after, her sonne either greeving that he could not have thefaulcon, or by extreamity of his disease, chanced to dye, leavinghis mother a most wofull lady.
after so much time was expired, as conveniently might agree withsorrow, and mourning; her brethren made many motions to her, to oyneher selfe in marriage againe, because she was extraordinarily rich,and as yet but yong in yeares. now although she was well contentednever to be married any more; yet being continually importuned bythem, and remembring the honorable honesty of frederigo, his lastpoore, yet magnificent dinner, in killing his faulcon for her sake,she saide to her brethren. this kind of widdowed estate doth like meso well, as willingly i would never leave it: but seeing you are soearnest for my second marriage, let me plainly tell you, that i willnever accept of any other husband, but onely frederigo di alberino.
her brethren in scornefull manner reprooved her, telling her, thathe was a begger, and had nothing left to keepe him in the world. iknow it well (quoth she) and am heartily sorry for it. but give me aman that hath neede of wealth, rather then wealth that hath neede of aman. the brethren hearing how she stood addicted, and knowingfrederigo to be a worthy gentleman, though poverty had disgraced himin the world: consented thereto, so she bestowed her selfe and herriches on him. he on the other side, having so noble a lady to hiswife, and the same whom he had so long and deerely loved, submittedall his fairest fortunes unto her, became a better husband (for theworld) then before, and they lived, and loved together in equall joyand happinesse.
the fift day, the tenth novell
reprehending the cunning of immodest women, who by abusing
themselves, do throw evill aspersions on all their sexe
pedro di vinciolo went to sup at a friends house in the city. hiswife (in the meane while) had a young man whom shee loved, at supperwith pedro returning home on a sodaine, the young man was hidden undera coope for hens. pedro in excuse of his so soone comming home,declareth, how in the house of herculano (with whom he should havesupt) a friend of his wives was found, which was the reason of thesuppers breaking off. pedroes wife reproving the error ofherculanoes wife, an asse (by chance) treads on the yong mansfingers that lay hidden under the hen-coope. upon his crying out pedrosteppeth thither, sees him, knowes him, and findeth the fallacy of hiswife; with whom (nevertbelesse) he groweth to agreement, in regardof some imperfections in himselfe.
the queenes novell being ended, and all applauding the happy fortuneof frederigo, as also the noble nature of madam giana; dioneusexpecting no command, prepared to deliver his discourse in this maner.i know not whether i should terme it a vice accidentall, and insuingthorow the badnes of complexions on us mortals; or an error in nature,to rejoyce rather at lewd accidents, then at deeds that deservecommendation, especially when they no way concern our selves. now,in regard that all the paines i have hitherto taken, and am also toundergo at this present aymeth at no other end, but onely to purgeyour minds of melancholly, and entertain the time with mirthfulmatter: pardon me i pray you (faire lacties) if my tale trip in somepart, and savour a little of immodesty; yet in hearing it, you mayobserve the same course, as you doe in pleasing and delightfullgardens, plucke a sweete rose, and preserve your fingers frompricking. which very easily you may doe, winking at theimperfections of a foolish man, and at the amourous subtilties ofhis wife, compassionating the misfortune of others, where urgentnecessity doth require it.
there dwelt not long since in perugia, a wealthy man named pedrodi vinciolo, who perhaps more to deceive some other, and restrainean evill opinion which the perugians had conceived of him, in matterno way beseeming a man, then any beauty or good feature remaining inthe woman entred into the estate of marriage. and fortune was soconforme to him in his election, that the woman whom he had made hiswife, had a yong, lusty, and well enabled bodie, a red-haird wench,hot and fiery spirited, standing more in neede of three husbands, thenhe, who could not any way well content one wife, because his minde ranmore on his mony, then those offices and duties belonging towedlock, which time acquainted his wife withall, contrary to herowne expectation, and those delights which the estate of marriageafforded, knowing her selfe also to be of a sprightly disposition, andnot to be easily tamed by houshold cares and attendances, shee waxedweary of her husbands unkind courses, upbraided him daily with harshspeeches, making his owne home meerly as a hell to him.
when she saw that this domesticke disquietnesse returned her nobenefit, but rather tended to her own consumption, then anyamendment in her miserable husband, shee began thus to conferre withher private thoughts. this husband of mine liveth with me, as if hewere no husband, or i his wife; the marriage bed, which should be acomfort to us both, seemeth hatefull to him, and as little pleasing tomee, because his minde is on his money, his head busied with worldlycogitations, and early and late in his counting-house, admitting nofamiliar conversation with me. why should not i be as respectlesseof him, as he declares him selfe to be of me? i tooke him for anhusband, brought him a good and sufficient dowry, thinking him to beman, and affected a woman as a man ought to doe, else he had neverbeene any husband of mine. if he be a woman hater, why did he makechoice of me to be his wife? if i had not intended to be of the world,i could have coopt my selfe up in a cloyster, and shorne my selfe anunne, but that i was not born to such severity of life. my youthshall be blasted with age before i can truly understand what youth is,and i shall be branded with the disgraceful word barrennesse,knowing my selfe meete and able to be a mother, were my husband butwort the name of a father, or expected issue and posterity, to leaveour memoriall to after times in our race, as all our predecessoursformerly have done, and for which mariage was chiefly instituted.castles long besieged, doe yeeld at the last, and women wronged bytheir owne husbands, can hardly warrant their owne frailety,especially living among so many temptations, which flesh and bloud arenot alwaies able to resist. well, i meane to be advised in thiscase, before i will hazard my honest reputation, either to suspitionor scandall, then which, no woman can have two heavier enemies, andvery few there are that can escape them.
having thus a long while consulted with her selfe, and (perhaps)oftner then twice or thrice; she became secretly acquainted with anaged woman, generally reputed to be more then halfe a saint, walkingalwayes very demurely in the streetes, counting (over and over) herpaters nosters, and all the cities holy pardons hanging at hergirdle never talking of any thing, but the lives of the holyfathers, or the woundes of saint frances, all the world admiring hersanctity of life, even as if shee were divinely inspired: this sheesaint must bee our distressed womans counsellour, and having found outa convenient season, at large she imparted all her minde to her, insome such manner as formerly you have heard, whereto she returned thisanswer.
now trust me daughter, thy case is to be pittied, and so much therather, because thou art in the flowre and spring time of thy youth,when not a minute of time is to bee left: for there is no greater anerrour in this life, then the losse of time, because it cannot beerecovered againe; and when the fiends themselves affright us, yet ifwee keepe our embers still covered with warme ashes on the hearth,they have not any power to hurt us. if any one can truly speakethereof, then i am able to deliver true testimony; for i know, but notwithout much perturbation of minde, and piercing afflictions in thespirit; how much time i lost without any profit. and yet i lost notall, for i would not have thee thinke me to bee so foolish, that i didaltogether neglect such an especiall benefit; which when i call tomind, and consider now in what condition i am, thou must imagine, itis no small hearts griefe to mee, that age should make me utterlydespised, and no fire affoorded to light my tinder.
with men it is not so, they are borne apt for a thousandoccasions, as well for the present purpose wee talke of, as infiniteother beside; yea, and many of them are more esteemed being aged, thenwhen they were young. but women serve onely for mens contentation, andto bring children; and therefore are they generally beloved, whichif they faile of, either it is by unfortunate marriage, or someimperfection depending on nature, not through want of good will inthemselves. wee have nothing in this world but what is given us, inwhich regard, wee are to make use of our time, and employ it thebetter while wee have it. for, when wee grow to bee old, our husbands,yea, our very dearest and nearest friends, will scarsely looke onus. wee are then fit for nothing, but to sit by the fire in thekitchin, telling tales to the cat, or counting the pots and panneson the shelves. nay, which is worse, rimes and songs is made of us,even in meere contempt of our age, and commendation of such as areyoung, the daintiest morsels are fittest for them, and wee referred tofeed on the scrappes from their trenchers, or such reversion as theycan spare us. i tell thee daughter, thou couldst not make choyce ofa meeter woman in all the city, to whom thou mightest safely openthy minde, and knowes better to advise thee then i doe. but rememberwithall, that i am poore, and it is your part not to suffer poverty tobee unsupplyed. i will make thee partaker of all these blessedpardons, at every altar i will say a pater noster, and an ave maria,that thou maist prosper in thy hearts desires, and be defended fromfoule sinne and shame, and so she ended her motherly counsell.
within a while after, it came to passe, that her husband was invitedfoorth to supper, with one named herculano, a kinde friend of his, buthis wife refused to goe, because she had appointed a friend tosupper with her, to whom the old woman was employed as hermessenger, and was well recompenced for her labour. this friend wasa gallant proper youth, as any all perugia yeelded, and scarcely washee seated at the table, but her husband was returned backe, andcalled to bee let in at the doore. which when shee perceived, shewas almost halfe dead with feare, and coveting to hide the youngman, that her husband should not have any sight of him, shee had noother meanes, but in an entry, hard by the parlour where they purposedto have supt, stood a coope or hen-pen, wherein shee used to keepe herpullen, under which hee crept, and then shee covered it with an oldeempty sacke, and after ranne ranne to let her husband come in. whenhee was entred into the house; as halfe offended at his so suddenreturne, angerly she saide: it seemes sir you are a shaver at yourmeate, that you have made so short a supper. in troth wife (quoth hee)i have not supt at all, no not so much as eaten one bit. how hapnedthat, said the woman? marry wife (quoth hee) i will tell you, and thenthus he began.
as herculano, his wife, and i were sitting downe at the table,very neere unto us wee heard one sneeze, whereof at the first wee madeno reckoning, untill wee heard it againe the second time, yeal athird, fourth, and fifth, and many more after, whereat wee were nota little amazed. now wife i must tell you, before wee entred the roomewhere we were to sup, herculanoes wife kept the doore fast shutagainst us, and would not let us enter in an indifferent while;which made him then somewhat offended, but now much more, when hee hadheard one to sneeze so often. demaunded of her a reason for it, andwho it was that thus sneezed in his house: hee started from the table,and stepping to a little doore neere the staires head, necessarilymade, to set such things in, as otherwise would be troublesome tothe roome, (as in all houses we commonly see the like) he perceived,that the party was hidden there, which wee had heard so often tosneeze before.
no sooner had hee opened the doore, but stich a smell of brimstonecame foorth (whereof wee felt not the least savour before) as madeus likewise to cough and sneeze, being no way able to refraine it.shee seeing her husband to bee much moved, excused the matter thus:that (but a little while before) shee had whited certaine linnenwith the smoake of brimstone, as it is a usuall thing to doe, and thenset the pan into that spare place, because it should not bee offensiveto us. by this time, herculano had espied him that sneezed, whobeing almost stifled with the smell, and closenesse of the small roomewherein hee lay, had not any power to helpe himselfe, but stillcontinued coughing and sneezing, even as if his heart would have splitin twaine. foorth hee pluckt him by the heeles, and perceiving howmatter had past, hee saide to her. i thanke you wife now i see thereason, why you kept us so long from comming into this roome: letmee die, if i beare this wrong at your hands. when his wife heardthese words, and saw the discovery of her shame; without returningeither excuse or answere, foorth of doores shee ranne, but whither,wee know not. herculano drew his dagger, and would have slaine himthat still lay sneezing: but i disswaded him from it, as well inrespect of his, as also mine owne danger, when the law shouldcensure on the deede. and after the young man was indifferentlyrecovered; by the perswasion of some neighbours comming in: hee wasclosely conveyed out of the house, and all the noyse quietly pacified.onely (by this meanes, and the flight of herculanoes wife) wee weredisappointed of our supper, and now you know the reason of my so soonereturning.
when shee had heard this whole discourse, then shee perceived,that other women were subject to the like infirmitie, and as wisefor themselves, as shee could be, though these the like sinisteraccidents might sometime crosse them: and gladly shee wished, thatherculanoes wives excuse, might now serve to acquite her: butbecause in blaming others errours, our owne may sometime chance toescape discovery, and cleare us, albeit wee are as guilty; in a sharpereprehending manner, thus shee began. see husband, heere is hansomebehaviour, of an holy faire-seeming, and saint-like woman, to whom idurst have confest my sinnes, i conceived such a religiousperswasion of her lives integrety, free from the least scruple oftaxation. a woman, so farre stept into yeeres, as shee is, to givesuch an evill example to younger women, is it not a sinne beyond allsufferance? accursed be the houre, when she was borne into this world,and her selfe likewise, to bee so lewdly and incontinently given; anuniversall shame and slaunder, to all the good women of our city.
shall i tearme her a woman, or rather some savage monster in awomans shape? hath shee not made an open prostitution of herhonesty, broken her plighted faith to her husband, and all the womanlyreputation shee had in this world? her husband, being an honourablecitizen, entreating her alwayes, as few men else in the city doe theirwives; what an heart-breake must this needes bee to him, good man?neither i, nor any honest man else, ought to have any pity on her, but(with our owne hands) teare her in peeces, or dragge her along to agood fire in the market place, wherein she and her minion should beconsumed together, and their base ashes dispersed abroad in the winde,least the pure aire should be infected with them.
then, remembring her owne case, and her poore affrighted friend, wholay in such distresse under the hen-coope; she began to advise herhusband, that he would be pleased to go to bed, because the nightpassed on apace. but pedro, having a better will to eate, then tosleepe, desired her to let him have some meate, else hee must goe tobed with an empty bellie; whereto shee answered. why husband (quothshee) doe i make any large provision, when i am de. bard of yourcompany? i would i were the wife of herculano, seeing you cannotcontent your selfe from one nights feeding, considering, it is nowover-late to make any thing ready.
it fortuned; that certaine husbandmen, which had the charge ofpedroes farmehouse in the countrey, and there followed his affaires ofhusbandry, were returned home this instant night, having their assesladen with such provision, as was to bee used in his city-house.when the asses were unladen, and set up in a small stable, withoutwatering; one off them being (belike) more thirsty then the rest,brake loose, and wandering all about smelling to seeke water, happenedinto the entry, where the young man lay hidden under the hen pen. now,hee being constrained (like a carpe) to lye flat on his belly, becausethe coope was over-weighty for him to carry, and one of his hands moreextended foorth, then was requisite for him in so urgent a shift: itwas his hap (or ill fortune rather) that the asse set his foote on theyoung mans fingers, treading so hard, and the paine being veryirkesome to him, as hee was enforced to cry out aloude: which pedrohearing, he wondered thereat not a little.
knowing that this cry was in his house, hee tooke the candle inhis hand, and going foorth of the parlour, heard the cry to be louder;because the asse removed not his foote, but rather trod the morefirmely on his hand. comming to the coope, driving the asse, andtaking off the old sacke, he espyed the young man, who, beside thepainefull anguish he felt of his fingers, arose up trembling, asfearing some outrage beside to bee offered him by pedro, who knewthe youth perfectly, and demaunded of him, how he came thither. noanswere did hee make to that question, but humbly entreated (forcharities sake) that hee would not doe him any harme. feare not (quothpedro) i will not offer thee any violence: onely tell mee how thoucamest hither, and for what occasion; wherein the youth fully resolvedhim.
pedro being no lesse joyfull for thus find. him, then his wife wassorrowfull, tooke him by the hand, and brought him into the parlour,where shee sate trembling and quaking, as not knowing what to say inthis distresse. seating himselfe directly before her, and holdingthe youth still fast by the hand, thus hee began. oh wife! what bitterspeeches did you use (even now) against the wife of herculano,maintaining that shee had shamed all other women, and justlydeserved to be burned? why did you not say as much of your selfe?or, if you had not the heart to speake, how could you bee so cruellagainst her, knowing your offence as great as hers? questionlesse,nothing else urged you thereto, but that all women are of one andthe same condition, covering their owne grosse faults by farreinferiour infirmities in others. you are a perverse generation,meerely false in your fairest shewes.
when she saw that he offered her no other violence, but gave hersuch vaunting and reproachfull speeches, holding still the young manbefore her face, meerely vexe and despight her: shee began to takeheart, and thus replied. doest thou compare mee with the wife ofherculano, who is an old, dissembling hypocrite? yet she can have ofhim whatsoever shee desireth, and he useth her as a woman ought to be,which favour i could never yet finde at thy hands. put the case,that thou keepest me in good garments; allowing mee to goe neatlyhosed and shod; yet well thou knowest, there are other meere mattersbelonging to a woman, and every way as necessarily required, bothfor the preservation of houshold quietnesse, and those other ritesbetweene a husband and wife. let mee be worser garmented, courserdieted, yea, debarred of all pleasure and delights; so i might once beworthy the name of a mother, and leave some remembrance ofwoman-hood behinde me. i tell thee plainely pedro, i am a woman asothers are, and subject to the same desires, as (by nature)attendeth on flesh and blood: looke how thou failest in kindnessetowards me, thinke it not amisse, if i doe the like to thee, andendeavour thou to win the worthy title of a father, because i was madeto be a mother.
when pedro perceived, that his wife had spoken nothing but reason,in regard of his over-much neglect towards her, and not using suchhoushold kindnesse, as ought to be betweene man and wife, hee returnedher this answer. well wife (quoth he) i confesse my fault, andhereafter will labour to amend it; conditionally, that this youth, norany other, may no more visite my house in my absence. get me thereforesomething to eate, for doubtlesse, this young man and thy selfe fellshort of your supper, by reason of my so soone returning home. introth husband, saide she, we did not eate one bit of any thing, andi will be a true and loyall wife to thee, so thou wilt be the liketo me. no more words then wife, replyed pedro, all is forgotten andforgiven, let us to supper, and we are all friends. she seeing hisanger was so well appeased, lovingly kissed him, and laying the cloth,set on the supper, which she had provided for her selfe and the youth,and so they supt together merrily, not one unkinde word passingbetweene them. after supper, the youth was sent away in friendlymanner, and pedro was alwayes afterward more loving to his wife,then formerly hee had beene, and no complaint passed on either side,but mutuall joy and houshold contentment, such as ought to beebetweene man and wife.
dioneus having ended this his tale, for which the ladies returnedhim no thankes, but rather angerly frowned on him: the queene, knowingthat her government was now concluded, arose, and taking off hercrowne of lawrell, placed it graciously on the head of madame eliza,saying. now madame, it is your turne to commaund. eliza havingreceived the honour, did (in all respects) as others formerly haddone, and after shee had enstructed the master of the houshold,concerning his charge during the time of her regiment, forcontentation of all the company; thus shee spake.
we have long since heard, that with witty words, ready answeresand sudden jests or taunts, many have checkt and reproved greatfolly in others, and to their no meane owne commendation. now, becauseit is a pleasing kinde of argument, ministring occasion of mirth andwit: my desire is, that all our discourse to morrow shall tendthereto. i meane of such persons, either men or women, who with somesudden witty answere, have encountred a scorner in his owne intention,and layed the blame where it justly belonged. every one commendedthe queenes appointment, because it savoured of good wit andjudgement; and the queene being risen, they were all discharged tillsupper time, falling to such severall exercises as themselves bestfancyed.
when supper was ended, and the instruments layed before them; by thequeenes consent, madam aemilia undertooke the daunce, and the song wasappointed to dioneus, who began many, but none that proved to anyliking, they were so palpably obsceene and idle, savouringaltogether of his owne wanton disposition. at the length, the queenelooking stearnely on him, and commanding him to sing a good one, ornone at all; thus he began.
the song
eyes, can ye not refraine your hourely weeping?
eares, how are you depriv'd of sweete attention?
thoughts, have you lost your quiet silent sleeping.
wit, who hath rob'd thee of thy rare invention?
the lacke of these, being life and motion giving:
are senselesse shapes, and no true signes of living.
eyes, when you gaz'd upon her angell beauty;
eares, while you heard her sweete delitious straines,
thoughts (sleeping then) did yet performe their duty,
wit, tooke sprightly pleasure in his paines.
while shee did live, then none of these were scanting,
but now (being dead) they all are gone, and wanting.
after that dioneus (by proceeding no further) declared the finishingof his song; many more were sung beside, and that of dioneus highlycommended. some part of the night being spent in other delightfullexercises, and a fitting houre for rest drawing on: they betookethemselves to their chambers, where we will leave them till tomorrow morning.
the induction to the sixt day
governed under the authority of madam eliza, and the argument
of the discourses or novells there to be recounted, doe concerne
sudden, persons; who by some witty words (when any have checkt or
retorting them) have revenged themselves, in a sudden, unexpected
and discreet answere, thereby preventing losse, danger, scorne
and disgrace, retorting them on the busi-headed questioners
the moone having past the heaven, lost her bright splendor, by thearising of a more powerfull light, and every part of our world beganto looke cleare: when the queene (being risen) caused all thecompany to be called, walking forth afterward upon the pearled dewe(so farre as was supposed convenient) in faire and familiar conferencetogether, according as severally they were disposed, and repetition ofdivers the passed novels, especially those which were most pleasing,and seemed so by their present commendations. but the sunne beeingsomewhat higher mounted, gave such a sensible warmth to the ayre, ascaused their returne backe to the pallace, where the tables werereadily covered against their comming, strewed with sweete hearbes andodoriferous flowers, seating themselves at the tables (before the heatgrew more violent) according as the queene commanded.
after dinner, they sung divers excellent canzonnets, and then somewent to sleepe, others played at the chesse, and some at the tables:but dioneus and madam lauretta, they sung the love-conflict betweenetroylus and cressida. now was the houre come, of repairing to theirformer consistory or meeting place, the queene having theretogenerally summoned them, and seating themselves (as they were wontto doe) about the faire fountaine. as the queene was commanding tobegin the first novell, an accident suddenly happened, which never hadbefalne before: to wit, they heard a great noyse and tumult, among thehoushold servants in the kitchin. whereupon, the queene caused themaster of the houshold to be called, demaunding of him, what noyseit was, and what might be the occasion thereof? he made answere,that lacisca and tindaro were at some words of discontentment, butwhat was the occasion thereof, he knew not. whereupon, the queenecommanded that they should be sent for, (their anger and violentspeeches still continuing) and being come into her presence, shedemaunded the reason of their discord; and tindaro offering to makeanswere, lacisca (being somewhat more ancient then he, and of afiercer fiery spirit, even as if her heart would have leapt out of hermouth) turned her selfe to him, and with a scornefull frowningcountenance, said. see how this bold, unmannerly and beastly fellow,dare presume to speake in this place before me: stand by (saucyimpudence) and give your better leave to answere; then turning tothe queene, thus shee proceeded.
madam, this idle fellow would maintaine to me, that signiorsicophanto marrying with madama della grazza, had the victory of hervirginity the very first night; and i avouched the contrary, becauseshee had been a mother twise before, in very faire adventuring ofher fortune. and he dared to affirme beside, that yong maides are sosimple, as to loose the flourishing aprill of their time, in meerefeare of their parents, and great prejudice of their friends.
and then the queene, somewhat offended at the folly of the formercontroversie, commanded madame philomena, that she should givebeginning to the dayes novels: which (in dutifull manner) sheeundertooke to doe, and seating her selfe in formall fashion, withmodest and very gracious gesture, thus she began.
the sixt day, the first novell
reprehending the folly of such men, as undertake to report
discourses, which are beyond their wit and capacity, and
gaine nothing but blame for their labour
a knight requested madam oretta, to ride behinde him on horse-backe,and promised, to tell her an excellent tale by the way. but the ladyperceiving, that his discourse was idle, and much worse delivered:entreated him to let her walke on foote againe.
gracious ladies, like as in our faire, cleere, and serene seasons,the starres are bright ornaments to the heavens, and the flowry fields(so long as the spring time lasteth) weare their goodliest liveries,the trees likewise bragging in their best adornings: even so atfriendly meetings, short, sweet, and sententious words, are the beautyand ornament of any discourse, savouring of wit and sound judgement,worthily deserving to be commended. and so much the rather, because infew and witty words, aptly suting with the time and occasion, moreis delivered then was expected, or sooner answered, then rashlyapprehended: which, as they become men verie highly, yet do theyshew more singular in women.
true it is, what the occasion may be, i know not, either by thebadnesse of our wittes, or the especiall enmitie betweene ourcomplexions and the celestiall bodies: there are scarsely any, or veryfew women to be found among us, that well knowes how to deliver aword, when it should and ought to be spoken; or, if a question beemooved, understands to suite it with an apt answere, such asconveniently is required, which is no meane disgrace to us women.but in regard, that madame pampinea hath already spoken sufficientlyof this matter, i meane not to presse it any further: but at this timeit shall satisfie mee, to let you know, how wittily a ladie made dueobservation of opportunitie, in answering of a knight, whose talkeseemed tedious and offensive to her.
no doubt there are some among you, who either do know, or (at theleast) have heard, that it is no long time since, when there dwelt agentlewoman in our citie, of excellent grace and good discourse,with all other rich endowments of nature remaining in her, as pitty itwere to conceale her name: and therefore let me tell ye, that shee wascalled madame oretta, the wife to signior geri spina. she being uponsome occasion (as now we are) in the countrey, and passing fromplace to place (by way of neighbourly invitations) to visite herloving friends and acquaintance, accompanied with divers knights andgentlewomen, who on the day before had dined and supt at her house, asnow (belike) the selfe-same courtesie was intended to her: walkingalong with her company upon the way; and the place for her welcomebeeing further off then she expected; a knight chanced to overtakethis faire troop, who well knowing madam oretta, using a kinde andcourteous salutation, spake thus.
madam, this foot travell may bee offensive to you, and were you sowell pleased as my selfe, i would ease your journey behinde mee onmy gelding, even so as you shall command me: and beside, wil shortenyour wearinesse with a tale worth the hearing. courteous sir(replyed the lady) i embrace your kinde offer with such acceptation,that i pray you to performe it; for therein you shall doe me anespeciall favour. the knight, whose sword (perhappes) was asunsuteable to his side, as his wit out of fashion for any readiediscourse, having the lady mounted behinde him rode on with a gentlepace, and (according to his promise) began to tell a tale, whichindeede (of it selfe) deserved attention, because it was a knowneand commendable history, but yet delivered so abruptly, with idlerepetitions of some particulars three or foure severall times,mistaking one thing for another, and wandering erroneously from theessentiall subject, seeming neere an end, and then beginning againe:that a poore tale could not possibly be more mangled, or worsetortured in telling, then this was; for the persons therein concerned,were so abusively nicke-named, their actions and speeches somonstrously mishapen, that nothing could appeare to be more ugly.
madame oretta, being a lady of unequalled ingenuitie, admirable injudgement, and most delicate in her speech, was afflicted in soule,beyond all measure; overcome with many colde sweates, and passionateheart-aking qualmes, to see a foole thus in a pinne-fold, and unableto get out, albeit the doore stood wide open to him, whereby sheebecame so sicke; that, converting her distaste to a kinde ofpleasing acceptation, merrily thus she spake. beleeve me sir, yourhorse trots so hard, and travels so uneasily; that i entreate you tolet me walke on foot againe.
the knight, being (perchance) a better understander, then adiscourser; perceived by this witty taunt, that his bowle had run acontrarie bias, and he as farre out of tune, as he was from the towne.so, lingering the time, untill her company was neerer arrived: heelefte her with them, and rode on as his wisedome could best directhim.
the sixt day, the second novell
approving, that a request ought to be civill, before it
should be granted to any one whatsoever
cistio a baker, by a wittie answer which he gave unto messer gerispina, caused him to acknowledge a very indiscreete motion, which hehad made to the said cistio.
the words of madame oretta, were much commended by the men andwomen; and the discourse being ended, the queene gave command to madampampinea, that shee should follow next in order, which made her tobegin in this manner.
worthy ladies, it exceedeth the power of my capacitie, to censure inthe case whereof i am to speake, by saying, who sinned most, eithernature, in seating a noble soule in a vile body, or fortune, inbestowing on a body (beautified with a noble soule) a base or wretchedcondition of life. as we may observe by cistio, a citizen of our owne,and many more beside; for, this cistio beeing endued with a singulargood spirit, fortune hath made him no better then a baker. and beleeveme ladies, i could (in this case) lay as much blame on nature, as onfortune; if i did not know nature to be most absolutely wise, and thatfortune hath a thousand eyes, albeit fooles have figured her to beeblinde. but, upon more mature and deliberate consideration, i finde,that they both (being truly wise and judicious) have dealt justly,in imitation of our best advised mortals, who being uncertaine of suchinconveniences, as may happen unto them, do bury (for their ownbenefit) the very best and choicest things of esteeme, in the mostvile and abject places of their houses, as being subject to leastsuspition, and where they may be sure to have them at all times, forsupply of any necessitie whatsoever, because so base a conveyance hathbetter kept them, then the very best chamber in the house could havedone. even so these two great commanders of the world, do many timeshide their most precious jewels of worth, under the clouds of artsor professions of worst estimation, to the end, that fetching themthence when neede requires, their splendor may appeare to be themore glorious. nor was any such matter noted in our homely bakercistio, by the best observation of messer geri spina, who was spokenof in the late repeated novell, as being the husband to madame oretta;whereby this accident came to my remembrance, and which (in a shorttale) i will relate unto you.
let me then tell ye, that pope boniface (with whom the fore-namedmesser geri spina was in great regard) having sent divers gentlemen ofhis court to florence as ambassadors, about very serious and importantbusinesse: they were lodged in the house of messer geri spina, andhe employed (with them) in the saide popes negotiation. it chanced,that as being the most convenient way for passage, every morningthey walked on foot by the church of saint marie d'ughi, wherecistio the baker dwelt, and exercised the trade belonging to him.now although fortune had humbled him to so meane a condition, yet sheeadded a blessing of wealth to that contemptible quality, and (assmiling on him continually) no disasters at any time befell him, butstill he flourished in riches, lived like a jolly citizen, with allthings fitting for honest entertainment about him, and plenty of thebest wines (both white and claret) as florence, or any part thereaboutyeelded.
our frolicke baker perceiving, that messer geri spina and theother ambassadors, used every morning to passe by his doore, andafterward to returne backe the same way: seeing the season to besomewhat hot and soultry, he tooke it as an action of kindnesse andcourtesie, to make them an offer of tasting his white wine. but havingrespect to his owne meane degree, and the condition of messer geri:hee thought it farre unfitting for him, to be so forward in suchpresumption; but rather entred into consideration of some such meanes,whereby messer geri might bee the inviter of himselfe to taste hiswine. and having put on him a trusse or thin doublet, of very whiteand fine linnen cloath, as also breeches, and an apron of the same,and a white cap upon his head, so that he seemed rather to be amiller, then a baker: at such times as messer geri and the ambassadorsshould daily passe by, hee set before his doore a new bucket offaire water, and another small vessell of bologna earth (as new andsightly as the other) full of his best and choisest white wine, withtwo small glasses, looking like silver, they were so cleare. downehe sate, with all this provision before him, and emptying his stomacketwice or thrice, of some clotted flegmes which seemed to offend it:even as the gentlemen were passing by, he dranke one or two rousesof his wine so heartily, and with such a pleasing appetite, as mighthave moved a longing (almost) in a dead man.
messer geri well noting his behaviour, and observing the veriesame course in him two mornings together; on the third day (as hewas drinking) he said unto him. well done cistio, what, is it good, orno? cistio starting up, forthwith replyed; yes sir, the wine is goodindeed, but how can i make you to beleeve me, except you taste ofit? messer geri, eyther in regard of the times quality, or by reasonof his paines taken, perhaps more then ordinary, or else, becausehee saw cistio had drunke so sprightly, was very desirous to tasteof the wine, and turning unto the ambassadors, in merriment hesaide. my lords, me thinks it were not much amisse, if we tooke ataste of this honest mans wine, perhaps it is so good, that we shallnot neede to repent our labour.
heereupon, he went with them to cistio, who had caused an handsomeseate to be fetched forth of his house, whereon he requested them tosit downe, and having commanded his men to wash cleane the glasses, hesaide. fellowes, now get you gone, and leave me to the performanceof this service; for i am no worse a skinker, then a baker, andtarry you never so long, you shall not drinke a drop. having thusspoken, himselfe washed foure or five small glasses, faire and new,and causing a viall of his best wine to be brought him: hee diligentlyfilled it out to messer geri and the ambassadours, to whom it seemedthe very best wine, that they had drunke of in a long while before.and having given cistio most hearty thankes for his kindnesse, and thewine his due commendation: many dayes afterwardes (so long as theycontinued there) they found the like courteous entertainment, and withthe good liking of honest cistio.
but when the affayres were fully concluded, for which they werthus sent to florence, and their parting preparation in duereadinesse: messer geri made a very sumptuous feast for them, invitingthereto the most part of the honourablest citizens, and cistio to beone amongst them; who (by no meanes) would bee seene in an assembly ofsuch state and pompe, albeit he was thereto (by the saide messer geri)most earnestly entreated.
in regard of which deniall, messer geri commaunded one of hisservants, to take a small bottle, and request cistio to fill it withhis good wine; then afterward, to serve it in such sparing manner tothe table, that each gentleman might be allowed halfe a glasse-full attheir down-sitting. the serving-man, who had heard great report of thewine, and was halfe offended because he could never taste thereof:tooke a great flaggon bottle, containing foure or five gallons atthe least, and comming there-with unto cistio, saide unto him. cistio,because my master cannot have your companie among his friends, heprayes you to fill this bottle with your best wine. cistio lookinguppon the huge flaggon, replyed thus. honest fellow, messer geri neversent thee with such a message to me: which although the serving-manvery stoutly maintained, yet getting no other answer, he returnedbacke therwith to his master.
messer geri returned the servant backe againe unto cistio, saying:goe, and assure cistio, that i sent thee to him, and if hee makethee any more such answeres, then demaund of him, to what place else ishould send thee? being come againe to cistio, hee avouched that hismaister had sent him, but cistio affirming, that hee did not: theservant asked, to what place else hee should send him? marrie (quothcistio) unto the river of arno, which runneth by florence, therethou mayest be sure to fill thy flaggon. when the servant had reportedthis answer to messer geri, the eyes of his understanding beganne toopen, and calling to see what bottle hee had carried with him: nosooner looked he on the huge flaggon, but severely reproving thesawcinesse of his servant, hee sayde. now trust mee, cistio toldthee nothing but trueth, for neither did i send thee with any suchdishonest message, nor had the reason to yeeld or grant it.
then he sent him with a bottle of more reasonable competencie, whichso soone as cistio saw: yea mary my friend, quoth he, now i am surethat thy master sent thee to me, and he shall have his desire with allmy hart. so, commaunding the bottle to be filled, he sent it away bythe servant, and presently following after him, when he came untomesser geri, he spake unto him after this maner. sir, i would not haveyou to imagine, that the huge flaggon (which first came) did any jottedismay mee; but rather i conceyved, that the small viall whereof youtasted every morning, yet filled many mannerly glasses together, wasfallen quite out of your remembrance; in plainer tearmes, it beeing nowine for groomes or peazants, as your selfe affirmed yesterday. andbecause i meane to bee a skinker no longer, by keeping wine toplease any other pallate but mine owne: i have sent you halfe mystore, and heereafter thinke of mee as you shall please. messer geritooke both his guifte and speeches in most thankefull manner,accepting him alwayes after, as his intimate friend, because he had sograced him before the ambassadours.
the sixt day, the third novell
wherein is declared, that mockers do sometimes meete with
their matches in mockery, and to their owne shame
madame nonna de pulci, by a sodaine answere, did put to silence abyshop of florence, and the lord marshall: having moved a questionto the said lady, which seemed to come short of honesty.
when madame pampinea had ended her discourse, and (by the wholecompany) the answere and bounty of cistio, had past with deservedcommendation: it pleased the queene, that madame lauretta shouldnext succeed: whereupon verie chearefully thus she beganne.
faire assembly, madame pampinea (not long time since) gavebeginning, and madam philomena hath also seconded the same argument,concerning the slender vertue remaining in our sexe, and likewisethe beautie of wittie words, delivered on apt occasion, and inconvenient meetings. now, because it is needlesse to proceede anyfurther, then what hath beene already spoken: let mee onely tell you(over and beside) and commit it to memorie, that the nature ofmeetings and speeches are such, as they ought to nippe or touch thehearer, like unto the sheepes nibling on the tender grasse, and not asthe sullen dogge byteth. for, if their biting be answereable to thedogges, they deserve not to be termed witty jests or quips, butfoule and offensive language: as plainly appeareth by the words ofmadame oretta, and the mery, yet sensible answer of cistio.
true it is, that if it be spoken by way of answer, and theanswerer biteth doggedly, because himselfe was bitten in the samemanner before: he is the lesse to bee blamed, because hee makethpayment but with coine of the same stampe. in which respect, anespeciall care is to bee had, how, when, with whom, and where wejest or gibe, whereof very many proove too unmindfull, as appeared(not long since) by a prelate of ours, who met with a byting, no lessesharpe and bitter, then had first come from himselfe before, asverie briefely i intend to tell you how.
messer antonio d'orso, being byshoppe of florence, a vertuous, wise,and reverend prelate; it fortuned that a gentleman of catalogna, namedmesser diego de la ratta, and lord marshall to king robert ofnaples, came thither to visite him. hee being a man of very comelypersonage, and a great observer of the choysest beauties in court:among all the other florentine dames, one proved to bee mostpleasing in his eye, who was a verie faire woman indeede, and neece tothe brother of the saide messer antonio.
the husband of this gentlewoman (albeit descended of a worthiefamily) was, neverthelesse, immeasurably covetous, and a verie harshnatured man. which the lord marshall understanding, made such amadde composition with him, as to give him five hundred ducates ofgold, on condition, that hee would let him lye one night with hiswife, not thinking him so base minded as to give consent. which in agreedy avaritious humour he did, and the bargaine being absolutelyagreed on; the lord marshall prepared to fit him with a payment,such as it should be. he caused so many peeces of silver to becunningly guilded, as then went for currant mony in florence, andcalled popolines, and after he had lyen with the lady (contrary to herwill and knowledge, her husband had so closely carried thebusinesse) the money was duely paid to the cornuted coxcombe.afterwards, this impudent shame chanced to be generally knowne,nothing remaining to the wilful wittoll, but losse of his expectedgaine, and scorne in every place where he went. the bishop likewise(beeing a discreete and sober man) would seeme to take no knowledgethereof; but bare out all scoffes with a well setled countenance.
within a short while after, the bishop and the lord marshal (alwaiesconversing together) it came to passe, that upon saint johns day, theyriding thorow the city, side by side, and viewing the bravebeauties, which of them might best deserve to win the prize: thebyshop espied a yong married lady (which our late greevouspestilence bereaved us of) she being named madame nonna de pulci,and cousine to messer alexio rinucci, a gentleman well knowne untous all. a very goodly beautifull yong woman she was, of delicatelanguage, and singular spirite, dwelling close by s. peters gate. thislady did the bishop shew to the marshall, and when they were come toher, laying his hand uppon her shoulder, he said. madam nonna, whatthinke you of this gallant? dare you adventure another wager with him?
such was the apprehension of this witty lady, that these wordsseemed to taxe her honour, or else to contaminate the hearersunderstanding, whereof there were great plenty about her, whosejudgement might be as vile, as the speeches were scandalous.wherefore, never seeking for any further purgation of her cleareconscience, but onely to retort taunt for taunt, presently thus shereplied. my lord, if i should make such a vile adventure, i wouldlooke to bee payde with better money.
these words being heard both by the bishop and marshall, they feltthemselves touched to the quicke, the one, as the factor or broker,for so dishonest a businesse, to the brother of the bishop; and theother, as receiving (in his owne person) the shame belonging to hisbrother. so, not so much as looking each on other, or speaking oneword together all the rest of that day, they rode away with blushingcheekes. whereby we may collect, that the yong lady, being soinjuriously provoked, did no more then well became her, to bitetheir basenesse neerely, that so abused her openly.
the sixt day, the fourth novell
whereby plainly appeareth, that a sodaine witty and merry answer,
doth oftentimes appease the furious choller of an
angry man
chichibio, the cooke to messer currado gianfiliazzi, by a sodainepleasant answer which he made to his master; converted his angerinto laughter, and thereby escaped the punishment, that messer meantto impose on him.
madam lauretta sitting silent, and the answer of lady nonna havingpast with generall applause: the queene commanded madame neiphila tofollow next in order; who instantly thus began. although a ready wit(faire ladies) doth many times affoord worthy and commendablespeeches, according to the accidents happening to the speaker: yetnotwithstanding, fortune (being a ready helper divers wayes to thetimorous) doth often tippe the tongue with such a present reply, asthe partie to speake, had not so much leysure as to thinke on, nor yetto invent; as i purpose to let you perceive, by a prety short novell.
messer currado gianfiliazzi (as most of you have both seene andknowen) living alwayes in our citie, in the estate of a noble citizen,beeing a man bountifull, magnificent, and within the degree ofknighthoode: continually kept both hawkes and hounds, taking nomeane delight in such pleasures as they yeelded, neglecting (for them)farre more serious imployments, wherewith our present subjectpresumeth not to meddle. upon a day, having kilde with his faulcon acrane, neere to a village called peretola, and finding her to beboth young and fat, he sent it to his cooke, a venetian borne, andnamed chichibio, with command to have it prepared for his supper.chichibio, who resembled no other, then (as he was indeede) aplaine, simple, honest mery fellow, having drest the crane as it oughtto bee, put it on the spit, and laide it to the fire.
when it was well neere fully roasted, and gave forth a very delicatepleasing savour; it fortuned that a young woman dwelling not faroff, named brunetta, and of whom chichibio was somewhat enamored,entred into the kitchin, and feeling the excellent smell of the crane,to please her beyond all savours, that ever she had felt before: sheentreated chichibio verie earnestly, that hee would bestow a leggethereof on her. whereto chichibio (like a pleasant companion, andevermore delighting in singing) sung her this answer.
my brunetta, faire and feat a,
why should you say so?
the meate of my master,
allowes you for no taster,
go from the kitchin go.
many other speeches past betweene them in a short while, but inthe end, chichibio, because hee would not have his mistressebrunetta angrie with him; cut away one of the cranes legges from thespit, and gave it to her to eate. afterward, when the fowle was servedup to the table before messer currado, who had invited certainstrangers his friends to sup with him, wondering not a little, hecalled for chichibio his cook; demanding what was become of the cranesother legge? whereto the venetian (being a lyar by nature) sodainelyanswered: sir, cranes have no more but one legge each bird. messercurrado, growing verie angry, replyed. wilt thou tell me, that a cranehath no more but one legge? did i never see a crane before this?chichibio persisting resolutely in his deniall, saide. beleeve me sir,i have told you nothing but the truth, and when you please, i wil makegood my wordes, by such fowles as are living.
messer currado, in kinde love to the strangers that hee hadinvited to supper, gave over any further contestation; onely hesaid. seeing thou assurest me, to let me see thy affirmation fortruth, by other of the same fowles living (a thing which as yet inever saw, or heard of) i am content to make proofe thereof tomorrow morning, till then i shall rest satisfied: but, upon my word,if i finde it otherwise, expect such a sound payment, as thy knaveryjustly deserveth, to make thee remember it all thy life time. thecontention ceassing for the night season, messer currado, who thoughhe had slept well, remained still discontented in his minde: arosein the morning by breake of day, and puffing and blowing angerly,called for his horses, commanding chichibio to mount on one of them;so riding on towards the river, where (earely every morning) he hadseene plenty of cranes, he sayde to his man; we shall see anonsirra, whether thou or i lyed yesternight.
chichibio perceiving, that his masters anger was not (as yet)asswaged, and now it stood him upon, to make good his lye; not knowinghow he should do it, rode after his master, fearfully trembling allthe way. gladly he would have made an escape, but hee could not by anypossible meanes, and on every side he looked about him, now before,and after behinde, to espy any cranes standing on both their legges,which would have bin an ominous sight to him. but being come neereto the river, he chanced to see (before any of the rest) upon thebanke thereof, about a dozen cranes in number, each of them standingbut upon one legge, as they use to do when they are sleeping.whereupon, shewing them quickly to messer currado, he said. now siryour selfe may see, whether i told you true yesternight, or no: i amsure a crane hath but one thigh, and one leg, as all here presentare apparant witnesses, and i have bin as good as my promise.
messer currado looking on the cranes, and well understanding theknavery of his man, replyed: stay but a little while sirra, and i willshew thee, that a crane hath two thighes, and two legges. thenriding somwhat neerer to them, he cryed out aloud, shough, shough,which caused them to set downe their other legs, and all fled away,after they had made a few paces against the winde for theirmounting. so going unto chichibio, he said: how now you lying knave,hath a crane two legs, or no? chichibio being well-neere at his witsend, not knowing now what answer hee should make; but even as itcame sodainly into his minde, said: sir, i perceive you are in theright, and if you would have done as much yesternight, and had cryedshough, as here you did: questionlesse, the crane would then haveset down the other legge, as these heere did: but if (as they) she hadfled away too, by that meanes you might have lost your supper.
this sodaine and unexpected witty answere, comming from such alogger-headed lout, and so seasonably for his owne safety: was sopleasing to messer currado, that he fell into a hearty laughter, andforgetting all anger, saide. chichibio, thou hast quit thy selfe well,and to my contentment: albeit i advise thee, to teach mee no more suchtrickes heereafter. thus chichibio, by his sodaine and merry answer,escaped a sound beating, which (otherwise) his master had inflicted onhim.
the sixt day, the fift novell
whereby may bee observed, that such as will speake contemptibly of
others, ought (first of all) to looke
respectively on their owne imperfections
messer forese da rabatte, and maister giotto, a painter by hisprofession, comming together from mugello, scornfully reprehendedone another for their deformity of body.
so soone as madame neiphila sate silent (the ladies having greatlycommended the pleasant answer of chichibio) pamphilus, by command fromthe queene, spake in this manner. woorthy ladies, it commeth topasse oftentimes, that like as fortune is observed divers wayes, tohide under vile and contemptible arts, the most great andunvalewable treasures of vertue (as, not long since, was welldiscoursed unto us by madame pampinea:) so in like manner hathappeared; that nature hath infused very singular spirits into mostmishapen and deformed bodies of men. as hath beene noted in two of ourowne citizens, of whom i purpose to speake in fewe words. the one ofthem was named messer forese de rabatta, a man of little and lowperson, but yet deformed in body, with a flat face, like a terrieror beagle, as if no comparison (almost) could bee made more ugly.but notwithstanding all this deformity, he was so singularlyexperienced in the lawes, that all men held him beyond any equall,or rather reputed him as a treasury of civill knowledge.
the other man, being named giotto, had a spirit of so greatexcellency, as there was not any particular thing in nature, themother and worke-mistresse of all, by continuall motion of theheavens; but hee by his pen and pensell could perfectly portrait;shaping them all so truly alike and resemblable, that they weretaken for the reall matters indeede; and, whether they were present orno, there was hardly any possibility of their distinguishing. sothat many times it happened, that by the variable devises he made, thevisible sence of men became deceived, in crediting those things tobe naturall, which were but meerly painted. by which meanes, heereduced that singular art to light, which long time before had lyenburied, under the grosse error of some; who, in the mysterie ofpainting, delighted more to content the ignorant, then to please thejudicious understanding of the wise, he justly deserving thereby, tobe tearmed one of the florentines most glorious lights. and so muchthe rather, because he performed all his actions, in the true andlowly spirit of humility: for while he lived, and was a master inhis art, above all other painters: yet he refused any such title,which shined the more majestically- in him, as appeared by such, whoknew much lesse then he, or his schollers either: yet his knowledgewas extreamly coveted among them.
now, notwithstanding all this admirable excellency in him: he wasnot (thereby) a jot the handsommer man (either in person orcountenance) then was our fore-named lawyer messer forese, andtherefore my novell concerneth them both. understand then (faireassemblie) that the possessions and inheritances of messer foreseand giotto, lay in mugello; wherefore, when holy-dayes were celebratedby order of court, and in the sommer time, upon the admittance of soapt a vacation; forese rode thither upon a very unsightly jade, suchas a man can sildome meet with worse. the like did giotto the painter,as ill fitted every way as the other; and having dispatched theirbusines there, they both returned backe towards florence, neither ofthem being able to boast, which was the best mounted.
riding on a faire and softly pace, because their horses could goe nofaster: and they being well entred into yeeres, it fortuned (asoftentimes the like befalleth in sommer) that a sodaine showre ofraine overtooke them; for avoyding whereof, they made all possiblehaste to a poore countreymans cottage, familiarly knowne to them both.having continued there an indifferent while, and raine unlikely tocease: to prevent allfurther protraction of time, and to arriveatflorence in due season; they borrowed two old cloakes of the pooreman, of over-worn and ragged country gray, as also two hoodes of thelike complexion, (because the poore man had no better) which didmore mishape them, then their owne ugly deformity, and made themnotoriously flouted and scorned, by all that met or over-tooke them.
after they had ridden some distance of ground, much moyled andbemyred with their shuffling jades, flinging the dirt every wayabout them, that well they might be termed two filthy companions:the raine gave over, and the evening looking somewhat cleare, theybegan to confer familiarly together. messer forese, riding a loftyfrench trot, everie step being ready to hoise him out of his saddle,hearing giottos discreete answers to every ydle question he made(for indeede he was a very elegant speaker) began to peruse andsurveigh him, even from the foote to the head, as we use to say. andperceiving him to be so greatly deformed, as no man could be worse, inhis opinion: without any consideration of his owne mishaping as bad,or rather more unsightly then hee; in a scoffing laughing humour,hee saide. giotto, doest thou imagine, that a stranger, who hadnever seene thee before, and should now happen into our companie,would beleeve thee to bee the best painter in the world, as indeedethou art? presently giotto (without any further meditation) returnedhim this answere. signior forese, i think he might then beleeve it,when (beholding you) hee could imagine that you had learned youra. b. c. which when forese heard, he knew his owne error, and saw hispayment returned in such coine, as he sold his wares for.
the sixt day, the sixth novel
michiele scalza proves to some young men that the family of thebaronchi was the most noble in the world, for which he gets a goodsupper.
michiele scalza, a young florentine, had so facetious and productivea genius that the principal youth of florence took a great deal ofpleasure in and thought it an honour to enjoy his company. being oneday at mont ughi with many gentlemen, the discussion happened to runupon the antiquity and nobility of the florentine families. somegave the preference to that of the uberti, others to that of thelamberti, everyone speaking, as people ordinarily do, according totheir different humours and interests.
when scalza heard what they all had to say, he smiling cried: "youare none of you in the right. i will maintain the family of thebaronchi to be the most ancient and noble not only in florence butalso in the whole world. all philosophers and such as can besupposed to know that family,. i'm confident, are of my opinion; andthat you may not mistake my meaning i must tell you i mean thebaronchi our neighbours, who dwell near santa maria maggiore." theyall presently fell a-laughing, and asked him whether he took themfor people of the other world that they should not know the baronchias well as he. "gentlemen," says scalza, "i am so far from takingyou for people of the other world that i will lay any one of you agood supper enough for six on what i affirm, and be judged by whom youplease."
the wager was laid, and they all agreed to leave the decision topietro di florentino, who was then present. everyone expected scalzawould lose, and began to laugh at him beforehand. he that was todetermine the matter, being very judicious, first heard the reasons ofthe opposite party, and then asked scalza how he could prove hisassertion.
"i will prove it so sufficiently," says he, that you shall all bethoroughly convinced. gentlemen," says he, "by how much a family ismost ancient by so much it is most noble. the family of the baronchiis the most ancient in florence, ergo it is the most noble. i havenothing, then, to prove but the antiquity of the baronchi. this willappear in that prometheus made them at the time that he first began tolearn to paint, and made others after he was master of his art. toconvince you of this, do but examine the figures of the one and theother: you'll find art and proportion in the composition of the one,whereas the others are but rough-drawn and imperfect. among thebaronchi you'll meet with one with a long narrow face, another witha prodigiously broad one; one is flat-nosed, another has a nose thatmeasures an ell; one has a long chin and jaws like an ass, another hashis short and flat, and is monkey-faced. nay, there are some of themthat have but one eye either larger or lower than the others have.in a word, their faces for all the world resemble such as childrenmake when they first begin to draw. prometheus, you will allow, mustbe no great master when he made these figures, as i told you before;and consequently they must be more noble as they are more ancient."
so diverting an argument made them all to laugh heartily. therepresentation he gave of the baronchi was so ust and natural thatthey all agreed he had won: and nothing was heard for a full quarterof an hour but "scalza has won!" and "the baronchi are the mostancient and noble family in all florence!"
the sixt day, the seventh novell
wherein is declared, of what worth it is to confesse
trueth, with a facetious and witty excuse
madam philippa, being accused by her husband rinaldo de pugliese,because he tooke her in adulterie, with a yong gentleman namedlazarino de guazzagliotri: caused her to bee cited before the judge.from whom she delivered her selfe, by a sodaine, witty, and pleasantanswer, and moderated a severe strict statute, formerly made againstwomen.
after that madame fiammetta had given over speaking, and all theauditory had sufficiently applauded the schollers honest revenge,the queene enjoyned philostratus, to proceede on next with his novell,which caused him to begin thus. beleeve me ladies, it is anexcellent and most commendable thing, to speak well, and to allpurposes: but i hold it a matter of much greater worth, to know how todo it, and when necessity doth most require it. which a gentlewoman(of whom i am now to speake) was so well enstructed in, as not onelyit yeelded the hearers mirthfull contentment, but likewise deliveredher from the danger of death, as (in few words) you shal hearerelated.
in the citie of pirato, there was an edict or statute, no lesseblameworthy (to speake uprightly) then most severe and cruell, which(without making any distinction) gave strict command; that everiewoman should be burned with fire, who husband found her in the acte ofadultery, with any secret or familiar friend, as one deserving tobee thus abandoned, like such as prostituted their bodies to publikesale or hire. during the continuance of this sharpe edict, it fortunedthat a gentlewoman, who was named phillippa, was found in herchamber one night, in the armes of a yong gentleman of the samecity, named lazarino de guazzagliotri, and by her owne husband,called rinaldo de pugliese, shee loving the young gallant, as her ownelife, because hee was most compleate in all perfections, and every wayas deerely addicted to her.
this sight was so irkesome to rinaldo, that, being overcom withextreame rage, hee could hardly containe from running on them, witha violent intent to kill them both: but feare of his owne lifecaused his forbearance, meaning to be revenged by some better way.such was the heate of his spleene and fury, as, setting aside allrespect of his owne shame: he would needs prosecute the rigour ofthe deadly edict, which he held lawfull for him to do, although itextended to the death of his wife. heereupon, having witnessessufficient, to approove the guiltinesse of her offence: a day beingappointed (without desiring any other counsell) he went in person toaccuse her, and required justice against her.
the gentlewoman, who was of an high and undauntable spirite, asall such are, who have fixed their affection resolvedly, and loveuppon a grounded deliberation: concluded, quite against the counselland opinion of her parents, kindred, and friends; to appeare in thecourt, as desiring rather to dye, by confessing the trueth with amanly courage, then by denying it, and her love unto so worthy aperson as he was, in whose arms she chanced to be taken; to livebasely in exile with shame, as an eternall scandall to her race. so,before the potestate, shee made her apparance, worthily accompaniedboth with men and women, all advising her to deny the acte: but she,not minding them or their perswasions, looking on the judge with aconstant countenance, and a voyce of setled resolve, craved to know ofhim, what hee demaunded of her?
the potestate well noting her brave carriage, her singular beautieand praiseworthy parts, her words apparantly witnessing the heighth ofher minde: beganne to take compassion on her, and doubted, leastshee would confesse some such matter, as should enforce him topronounce the sentence of death against her. but she boldly scorningall delayes, or any further protraction of time; demanded again,what was her accusation? madame, answered the potestate, i am soryto tel you, what needs i must, your husband (whom you see presentheere) is the complainant against you, avouching, that he tooke you inthe act of adultery with another man: and therefore he requireth,that, according to the rigour of the statute heere in force with us, ishould pronounce sentence against you, and (consequently) theinfliction of death. which i cannot do, if you confesse not thefact, and therefore be well advised, how you answer me, and tell methe truth, if it be as your husband accuseth you, or no.
the lady, without any dismay or dread at all, pleasantly thusreplied. my lord, true it is, that rinaldo is my husband, and thathe found me, on the night named, betweene the armes of lazarino, wheremany times heeretofore he hath embraced mee, according to themutuall love re-plighted together, which i deny not, nor ever will.but you know well enough, and i am certaine of it, that the lawesenacted in any countrey, ought to be common, and made with consentof them whom they concerne, whichin this edict of yours is quitecontrarie. for it is rigorous against none, but poore women onely, whoare able to yeeld much better content and satisfaction generally, thenremaineth in the power of men to do. and moreover, when this law wasmade, there was not any woman that gave consent to it, neither werethey called to like or allow thoreof: in which respect, it maydeservedly be termed, an unjust law. and if you will, in prejudiceof my bodie, and of your owne soule, be the executioner of sounlawfull an edict, it consisteth in your power to do as you please.
but before you proceede to pronounce any sentence, may it please youto favour me with one small request, namely, that you would demandof my husband, if at all times, and whensoever he tooke delight inmy company, i ever made any curiosity, or came to him unwillingly.whereto rinaldo, without tarrying for the potestate to moove thequestion, sodainly answered; that (undoubtedly) his wife at all times,and oftner then he could request it, was never sparing of herkindnesse, or put him off with any deniall. then the lady,continuing on her former speeches, thus replyed. let me then demand ofyou my lord, being our potestate and judge, if it be so, by myhusbands owne free confession, that he hath alwaies had his pleasureof me, without the least refusall in me, or contradiction; what shouldi doe with the over-plus remaining in mine owne power, and whereofhe had no need? would you have mee cast it away to the dogges? wasit not more fitting for me, to pleasure therwith a worthy gentleman,who was even at deaths doore for my love, then (my husbandssurfetting, and having no neede of me) to let him lye languishing, anddye?
never was heard such an examination before, and to come from a womanof such worth, the most part of the honourable pratosians (bothlords and ladies) being there present, who hearing her urge such anecessary question, cryed out all loud together with one voice(after they had laughed their fill) that the lady had saide well,and no more then she might. so that, before they departed thence, bycomfortable advice proceeding from the potestate: the edict (beingreputed overcruell) was modified, and interpreted to concerne themonely, who offered injurie to their husbands for money. by whichmeanes rinaldo standing as one confounded, for such a foolish andunadvised enterprize, departed from the auditorie: and the ladie,not a little joyfull to bee thus freed and delivered from the fire,returned home with victorie to her owne house.
the sixt day, the eighth novell
in just scorne of such unsightly and ill-pleasing surly sluts, who
imagine none to be faire or well-favoured, but
themselves
fresco da celatico, counselled and advised his neece cesca: thatif such as deserved to be looked on, were offensive to her eyes, asshe had often told him; she should forbeare to looke on any.
all the while as philostratus was recounting his novell; itseemed, that the ladies (who heard it) found themselves much moovedthereat, as by the wanton blood mounting up into their cheekes, itplainly appeared.
but in the end, looking on each other with strange behaviour, theycould not forbeare smiling: which the queene interrupting by a commandof attention, turning to madame aemillia, willed her to follow next.when she, puffing and blowing, as if she had bene newly awaked fromsleepe, began in this manner.
faire beauties; my thoughts having wandred a great distance hence,and further then i can easily collect them together againe; inobedience yet to our queene, i shall report a much shorter novell,then otherwise (perhappes) i should have done, if my minde had beene alittle neerer home. i shall tell you the grosse fault of a foolishdamosell, well corrected by a witty reprehension of her unckle; ifshee had bin endued but with so much sence, as to have understood it.
an honest man, named fresco da celatico, had a good fulsom wenchto his neece, who for her folly and squemishnes, was generallycalled cesta, or nice francesca. and althogh she had staturesufficient, yet none of the handsomest, and a good hard favourdcountenance, nothing nere such angelical beauties as we have seen; yetshe was endued with such height of minde, and so proud an opinion ofher selfe, that it appeared as a custome bred in hir, or rather a giftbestowed on hir by nature (thogh none of the best) to blame anddespise both men and women, yea whosoever she lookt on; without anyconsideration of her self, she being as unsightly, ill shaped, andugly faced, as a worse was very hardly to be found.
nothing could be done at any time, to yeilde her liking orcontent: moreover, she was so waspish, nice and squemish, that whenshe cam into the royall court of france, it was hatefull andcontemptible to hir. whensoever she went through the streets, everything stunke and was noisome to her; so that she never did any thingbut stop her nose; as if all men or women she met withall; andwhatsoever else she lookt on, were stinking and offensive. but letus leave all further relation of her ill conditions, being every way(indeed) so bad, and hardly becomming any sensible body, that wecannot condemne them so much as we should.
it chanced upon a day, that shee comming home to the house where herunckle dwelt, declared her wonted scurvy and scornfull behaviour;swelling, puffing, and pouting extreamly, in which humor she sat downeby her unckle, who desiring to know what had displeased her, said. whyhow now francesca? what may the meaning of this bee? this being asolemne festivall day, what is the reason of your so soone returninghome? she coily biting the lip, and brideling her head, as if shehad bene some mans best gelding, sprucely thus replyed.
indeede you say true unckle, i am come home verie earely, because,since the day of my birth, i never saw a city so pestered withunhandsome people, both men and women, and worse this high holyday,then ever i did observe before. i walked thorow some store ofstreetes, and i could not see one proper man: and as for the women,they are the most mishapen and ugly creatures, that, if god had mademe such an one, i should be sory that ever i was borne. and being nolonger able to endure such unpleasing sights; you wil not thinke(unckle) in what an anger i am come home. fresco, to whome thesestinking qualities of his neece seemed so unsufferable, that hee couldnot (with patience) endure them any longer, thus short and quickelyanswered. francesca, if all people of our citie (both men and women)be so odious in thy eyes, and offensive to thy nose, as thou hastoften reported to me: bee advised then by my counsell. stay stil athome, and look upon none but thy selfe onely, and then thou shalt besure that they cannot displease thee. but shee, being as empty ofwit as a pith-lesse cane, and yet thought her judgement to exceedsalomons, could not understand the lest part of hir unkles meaning,but stood as senselesse as a sheepe. onely she replyed, that she wouldresort to some other parts of the country, which if shee found asweakly furnished of handsome people, as heere shee did, shee wouldconceive better of her selfe, then ever she had done before.
the sixt day, the ninth novell
notably discovering the great difference that is betweene
learning and ignorance, upon judicious apprehension
signior guido cavalcante, with a sodaine and witty answer,reprehended the rash folly of certaine florentine gentlemen, thatthought to scorne and flout him.
when the queene perceived, that madame aemillia was discharged ofher novell, and none remained now to speake next, but onely her selfe,his priviledge alwayes remembred, to whom it belonged to be thelast, she began in this manner.
faire company, you have this day disappointed me of two novells atthe least, whereof i had intended to make use. neverthelesse, youshall not imagine mee so unfurnished, but that i have left one instore; the conclusion whereof, may minister such instruction, aswill not bee reputed for ydle and impertinent: but rather of suchmateriall consequence, as better hath not this day past among us.
understand then (most faire ladies) that in former times longsince past, our cittie had many excellent and commendable customesin it; whereof (in these unhappy dayes of ours) we cannot say thatpoore one remaineth, such hath beene the too much encrease of wealthand covetousnesse, the onely supplanters of all good qualitieswhatsoever. among which lawdable and friendly observations, therewas one well deserving note, namely, that in divers places offlorence, men of the best houses in every quarter, had a sociableand neighbourly assemblie together, creating their company toconsist of a certaine number, such as were able to supply theirexpences; as this day one, and to morrow another: and thus in akinde of friendly course, each dally furnished the table, for the restof the company. oftentimes, they did honour to divers gentlemen andstrangers, upon their arrivall in our citty, by inviting them intotheir assembly, and many of our worthiest citizens beside; so thatit grew to a customary use, and one especially day in the yeareappointed, in memory of this so loving a meeting, when they would ride(triumphally as it were) on horsebacke thorow the cittie, sometimesperforming tilts, tourneyes, and other martiall exercises, but theywere reserved for feastivall dayes.
among which company, there was one called, signior bettobruneleschi, who was earnestly desirous, to procure signior guidocavalcante de cavalcanti, to make one in this their friendlysociety. and not without great reason: for, over and beside hisbeing one of the best logitians as those times could not yeeld abetter: he was also a most absolute naturall philosopher (which worthyqualities were little esteemed among these honest meeters) a veryfriendly gentleman, singularly well spoken, and whatsoever else wascommendable in any man, was no way wanting in him, being wealthywithall, and able to returne equall honors, where he found them tobe duly deserved, as no man therin could go beyond him. but signiorbetto, notwithstanding his long continued importunitie, could not drawhim into their assembly, which made him and the rest of his companyconceive, that the solitude of guido, retiring himselfe alwaies fromfamiliar conversing with men: provoked him to many curiousspeculations: and because he retained some part of the epicureanopinion, their vulgare judgement passed on him, that hisspeculations tended to no other end, but onely to finde out that whichwas never done.
it chanced upon a day, that signior guido departing from thechurch of saint michaell d'horta, and passing along by the adamari, sofarre as to saint johns church, which evermore was his customariewalke: many goodly marble tombes were then about the saide church,as now adayes are at saint reparata, and divers more beside. heentring among the collumbes of porphiry, and the other sepulchersbeing there, because the doore of the church was shut: signior bettoand his companie, came riding from s. reparata, and espying signiorguldo among the graves and tombes, said. come, let us go make somejests to anger him. so putting the spurs to their horses, they rodeapace towards him: and being upon him before he perceived them, one ofthem said. guido thou refusest to be one of our society, and seekestfor that which never was: when thou hast found it, tell us, whatwilt thou do with it?
guido seeing himselfe round engirt with them, sodainly thus replyed:gentlemen, you may use mee in your owne house as you please. andsetting his hand on one of the tombes (which was some-what great) hetooke his rising, and leapt quite over it on the further side, asbeing of an agile and sprightly body, and being thus freed fromthem, he went away to his owne lodging. they stoode all like menamazed, strangely looking one upon another, and began afterward tomurmure among themselves: that guido was a man without anyunderstanding, and the answer which he had made unto them, was to nopurpose, neither favoured of any discretion, but meerely came froman empty brain because they had no more to do in the place where nowthey were, then any of the other citizens, and signior guido(himselfe) as little as any of them; whereto signior betto thusreplyed.
alas gentlemen, it is you your selves that are void ofunderstanding: for, if you had but observed the answer which he madeunto us: hee did honestly, and (in verie few words) not onelynotably expresse his owne wisedome, but also deservedly reprehendus. because, if wee observe things as we ought to doe, graves andtombes are the houses of the dead, ordained and prepared to be theirlatest dwellings. he tolde us moreover, that although we have heere(in this life) other habitations and abidings; yet these (or the like)must at last be our houses. to let us know, and all other foolish,indiscreete, and unleartied men, that we are worse then dead men, incomparison of him, and other men equall to him in skill andlearning. and therefore, while wee are heere among these graves andmonuments, it may well be said, that we are not farre from our ownehouses, or how soone we shall be possessors of them, in regard ofthe frailty attending on us.
then every one could presently say, that signior guido had spokennothing but the truth, and were much ashamed of their owne folly,and shallow estimation which they had made of guido, desiring nevermore after to meddle with him so grossely, and thanking signior betto,for so well reforming their ignorance, by his much betterapprehension.
the sixt day, the tenth novell
wherein may be observed, what palpable abuses do many times
passe, under the counterfeit cloake of religion
fryer onyon, promised certaine honest people of the countrey, toshew them a feather of the same phoenix, that was with noah in hisarke. in sted whereof, he found coales, which he avouched to bethose very coals, wherewith the same phoenix was roasted.
when of them had delivered their novels, dioneus knowing, that itremained in him to relate the last for this day: without attending forany solemne command (after he had imposed silence on them, thatcould not sufficiently commend the witty reprehension of guido),thus he began. wise and worthy ladies, although by the priviledgeyou have granted, it is lawfull for me to speake any thing bestpleasing to my self: yet notwithstanding, it is not any part of mymeaning, to varrie from the matter and method, whereof you have spokento very good purpose. and therefore, following your footsteppes, ientend to tell you, how craftily, and with a rampiar sodainly raisedin his owne defence: a religious frier of saint anthonies order,shunned a shame, which two o wily companions had prepared for him. norlet it offend you, if i run into more large discourse, then this dayhath bene used by any, for the apter compleating of my novell:because, if you well observe it, the sun is as yet in the middest ofheaven, and therefore you may the better forbeare me.
certaldo, as (perhaps) you know, or have heard, is a village inthe vale of elsa, and under the authority and commaund of ourflorence, which although it be but small: yet (in former times) ithath bin inhabited with gentlemen, and people of especiall respect.a religious friar of s. anthonies order, named friar onyon, had longtime used to resort thither, to receive the benevolent almes, whichthose charitably affected people in simplicity gave him, and chieflyat divers daies of the year, when their bounty and devotion wouldextend themselves more largely then at other seasons. and so muchthe rather, because they thought him to be a good pastor of holylife in outward appearance, and carried a name of much greater matter,then remained in the man indeed; beside, that part of the countryyeilded far more plentifull abundance of onyons, then all other intuscany elsewhere, a kinde of foode greatly affected by thosefriars, as men alwaies of hungry and good appetite. this friar onyonwas a man of litle stature red haire, a chearfull countenance, and theworld afforded not a more crafty companion, then he. moreover,albeit he had very little knowledge or learning, yet he was so prompt,ready and voluble of speech, uttering often he knew not what himselfe:that such as were not wel acquainted with his qualities, supposedhim to be a singular rhetoritian, excelling cicero or quintilianthemselves; and he was a gossip, friend, or deerely affected, by everyone dwelling in those parts. according to his wonted custome, one timehe went thither in the month of august, and on a sunday morning,when all the dwellers thereabout, were present to heare masse, andin the chiefest church above all the rest: when the friar saw timeconvenient for his purpose, he advanced himselfe, and began tospeake in this manner.
gentlemen and gentlewomen, you know you have kept a commendablecustom, in sending yeerly to the poore brethren of our lord baron s.anthony, both of your corne and other provision, some more, somelesse, all according to their power, means, and devotion, to the endthat blessed s. anthony should be the more carefull of your oxen,sheep, asses, swine, pigs, and other cattle. moreover, you have usedto pay (especially such as have their names registred in ourfraternity) those duties which annually you send unto us. for thecollection whereof, i am sent by my superior, namely our l. abbot, andtherfore (with gods blessing) you may come after noone hither, whenyou shal heare the bels of the church ring: then wil i make apredication to you; you shall kisse the crosse, and beside, becausei know you al to be most devout servants to our lord baron s. anthony,in especiall grace and favor, i wil shew you a most holy and goodlyrelique, which i my selfe (long since) brought from the holy landbeyond the seas. if you desire to know what it is, let me tell you,that it is one of the feathers of the same phoenix, which was in thearke with the patriarch noah. and having thus spoken, he becamesilent, returning backe to heare masse. while hee delivered theseand the like speeches, among the other people then in the church,there were two shrewde and crafty companions; the one, named john debragoniero, and the other, biagio pizzino. these subtile fellowes,after they had heard the report of fryer onyons relique: althoghthey were his intimate friends, and came thither in his company; yetthey concluded betweene themselves, to shew him a tricke oflegierdumaine, and to steale the feather from him. when they hadintelligence of friar onyons dining that day at the castle, with aworthy friend of his: no sooner was he set at the table, but away wentthey in all haste, to the inne where the fryar frequented, with thisdetermination, that biagio should hold conference with the friars boy,while his fellow ransackt the wallet, to finde the feather, andcarry it away with him, for a future observation, what the friar wouldsay unto the people, when he found the losse of the feather, and couldnot performe his promise to them.
the fryars boy, whom some called guccio balena, some guccio imbrata,and others guccio porco, was such a knavish lad, and had so many badqualities, as lippo topo the cunning painter, or the most curiouspoeticall wit, had not any ability to describe them. friar onyonhimself did often observe his behaviour, and would make this reportamong his friends. my boy (quoth he) hath nine rare qualities inhim, and such they are, as if salomon, aristotle, or seneca hadonely but one of them: it were sufficient to torment and trouble alltheir vertue, all their senses, and all their sanctity. consider then,what manner of man he is like to be, having nine such rarities, yetvoide of all vertue, wit, or goodnes. and when it was demaunded offriar onyon, what these nine rare conditions were: hee having them allreadie by heart, and in rime, thus answered.
boyes i have knowne, and seene,
and heard of many:
but,
for lying, loytring, lazinesse,
for facing, filching, filthinesse;
for carelesse, gracelesse, all unthriftinesse,
my boy excelleth any.
now, over and beside all these admirable qualities, hee hath maniemore such singularities, which (in favour towards him) i am faine toconceale. but that which i smile most at in him, is, that he wouldhave a wife in every place where he commeth, yea, and a good houseto boot too: for, in regard his beard beginneth to shew it selfe,rising thicke in haire, blacke and amiable, he is verily perswaded,that all women will fall in love with him; and if they refuse tofollow him, he will in all hast run after them. but truly, he is anotable servant to mee, for i cannot speake with any one, and in neverso great secrecy, but he will be sure to heare his part; and whenany question is demanded of me, he standes in such awe and feare of mydispleasure: that he will bee sure to make the first answer, yea orno, according as he thinketh it most convenient.
now, to proceede where we left, friar onyon having left thisserviceable youth at his lodging, to see that no bodie should meddlewith his commodities, especially his wallet, because of the sacredthings therein contained: guccio imbrata, who as earnestly affected tobe in the kitchin, as birds to hop from branch to branch,especially, when anie of the chamber-maides were there, espyed oneof the hostesses female attendants, a grosse fat trugge, low ofstature, ill faced, and worse formed, with a paire of brests liketwo bumbards, smelling loathsomely of grease and sweate; downe sheedescended into the kitchin, like a kite upon a peece of carion. thisboy, or knave, chuse whither you will style him, having carelesly leftfryar onyons chamber doore open, and all the holy things so much to beneglected, although it was then the moneth of august, when heate is inthe highest predominance, yet hee would needs sit downe by the fire,and began to conferre with this amiable creature, who was called bythe name of nuta.
being set close by her, he told her, that he was a gentleman byatturniship, and that he had more millions of crownes, then all hislife time would serve him to spend; beside those which he payed awaydayly, as having no convenient im-ployment for them.
moreover, he knew how to speake, and do such things, as werebeyond wonder or admiration. and, never remembring his olde tatterdfriars cowle, which was so snottie and greazie, that good store ofkitchin stuffe might have beene boiled out of it; as also a fouleslovenly trusse or halfe doublet, all baudied with bowsing, fatgreazie lubberly sweating, and other drudgeries in the conventkitchin, where he was an officer in the meanest credite. so that todescribe this sweet youth in his lively colours, both for naturallperfections of body, and artificiall composure of his garments;never came the fowlest silks out of tartaria or india, more ugly orunsightly to bee lookt upon. and for a further addition to his neateknavery, his breeches were so rent betweene his legges, his shooes andstockings had bin at such a mercilesse massacre: that the gallantestcommandador of castile (though he had never so lately bin releastout of slavery) could have wisht for better garments, then he; or makelarger promises, then he did to his nuta. protesting to entitle her ashis onely, to free her from the inne and chamber thraldomes, if shewould live with him, be his love, partaker of his present possessions,and so to succeed in his future fortunes. all which bravadoes,though they were belcht foorth with admirable insinuations: yet theyconverted into smoke, as all such braggadochio behaviours do, and hewas as wise at the ending, as when he began.
our former named two craftie companions, seeing guccio porco soseriously employed about nuta, was there-with not a littlecontented, because their intended labour was now more then halfeended. and perceiving no contradiction to crosse their proceeding,into friar onyons chamber entred they, finding it ready open for theirpurpose: where the first thing that came into their hand in search,was the wallet. when they had opened it, they found a small cabinet,wrapped in a great many foldings of rich taffata; and havingunfolded it, a fine formall key was hanging thereat: wherwith havingunlockt the cabinet, they found a faire feather of a parrots taile,which they supposed to bee the verie same, that he meant to shew thepeople of certaldo. and truly (in those dayes) it was no hard matterto make them beleeve any thing, because the idle vanities of aegyptand those remoter parts, had not (as yet) bin seene in tuscany, assince then they have bin in great abundance, to the utter ruine(almost) of italy.
and although they might then be knowne to very few, yet theinhabitants of the country generally, understoode little or nothing atall of them. for there, the pure simplicitie of their ancientpredecessors still continuing; they had not seene any parrots, or somuch as heard any speech of them. wherefore the two crafty consorts,not a little joyfull of finding the feather, tooke it thence withthem, and beecause they would not leave the cabinet empty, espyingcharcoales lying in a corner of the chamber, they filled it with them,wrapping it up againe in the taffata, and in as demure manner asthey found it. so, away came they with the feather, neither seene orsuspected by any one, intending now to heare what friar onyon wouldsay, uppon the losse of his precious relique, and finding the coalesthere placed insted thereof.
the simple men and women of the country, who had bin at morningmasse in the church, and heard what a wonderful feather they shouldsee in the after noone, returned in all hast to their houses, whereone telling this newes to another, and gossip with gossip consultingtheron; they made the shorter dinner, and afterward flocked in mainetroopes to the castle, contending who shold first get entrance, suchwas their devotion to see the holy feather. friar onyon havingdined, and reposed a litle after his wine, he arose from the tableto the window, where beholding what multitudes came to see thefeather, he assured himselfe of good store of mony. hereupon, hesent to his boy guccio imbrata, that uppon the bels ringing, he shouldcome and bring the wallet to him. which (with much ado) he did, sosoone as his quarrell was ended in the kitchin, with the amiablechamber-maid nuta, away then he went with his holy commodities:where he was no sooner arrived, but because his belly was readie toburst with drinking water, he sent him to the church to ring the bels,which not onely would warme the cold water in his belly, butlikewise make him run as gaunt as a grey-hound.
when all the people were assembled in the church together, friaronyon (never distrusting any injurie offered him, or that his closecommodities had bin medled withal) began his predication, uttering athousand lies to fit his purpose. and when he came to shew the featherof the phoenix (having first in great devotion finisht the confession)he caused two goodly torches to be lighted, and ducking downe his headthree severall times, before hee would so much as touch the taffata,he opened it with much reverence. so soone as the cabinet came to beseen, off went his hood, lowly he bowed downe his body, and utteringespecial praises of the phoenix, and sacred properties of thewonderfull relique, the cover of the cabinet being lifted uppe, he sawthe same to bee full of coales. he could not suspect his villaineboy to do this deede, for he knew him not to be endued with so muchwit, onely hee curst him for keeping it no better, and cursthimselfe also, for reposing trust in such a careles knave, knowing himto be slothfull, disobedient, negligent, and void of all honestunderstanding or grace. sodainly (without blushing) lest his losseshould be discerned, he lifted his lookes and hands to heaven,speaking out so loude, as every one might easily heare him, thus: othou omnipotent providence, for ever let thy power be praised. thenmaking fast the cabinet againe, and turning himselfe to the people,with lookes expressing admiration, he proceeded in this manner.
lords, ladies, and you the rest of my worthy auditors: you are tounderstand, that i (being then very young) was sent by my superiour,into those parts, where the sun appeareth at his first rising. and ihad received charge by expresse command, that i should seeke for (somuch as consisted in my power to do) the especiall vertues andpriviledges belonging to porcellane, which although the boylingthereof bee worth but little, yet it is very profitable to any but us.in regard whereof, being upon my journey, and departing from venice,passing along the borgo de grecia, i proceeded thence (on horseback)through the realme of garbo, so to baldacca, till i came to parione;from whence, not without great extremity of thirst, i arrived insardignia.
but why do i trouble you with the repetition of so many countries? icoasted on still, after i had past saint georges arme, into truffia,and then into buffia which are countries much inhabited, and withgreat people. from thence i went into the land of lying, where i foundstore of the brethren of our religion, and many other beside, whoshunned all paine and labour, onely for the love of god, and caredas little, for the paines and travailes which others tooke, exceptsome benefit arised thereby to them; nor spend they any money inthis country, but such as is without stampe. thence i went into theland of abruzzi, where the men and women goe in galoches over themountaines, and make them garments of their swines guts. not farrefrom thence, i found people, that carried bread in their staves, andwine in satchels, when parting from them, i arrived among themountaines of bacchus, where all the waters run downe with a deepefall, and in short time, i went on so far, that i found my selfe to bein india pastinaca; where i swear to you by the holy habit which iweare on my body, that i saw serpents bye, things incredible, and suchas were never seene before.but because i would be loth to lye, so soone as i departed thence,i met with maso de saggio, who was a great merchant there, and whomi found cracking nuts, and selling cockles by retale. neverthelesse,al this while i could not finde what i sought for, and therefore i wasto passe from hence by water, if i intended to travaile thither, andso into the holy land, where coole fresh bread is sold for fourepence, and the hot is given away for nothing. there i found thevenerable father (blame me not i beseech you) the most woorthiepatriarch of jerusalem, who for the reverence due to the habite iweare, and love to our lord baron saint anthony, would have me tosee al the holy reliques, which he had there under his charge:wherof there were so many, as if i should recount them all to you, inever could come to a conclusion. but yet not to leave youdiscomforted, i will relate some few of them to you. first of all,he shewed me the finger of the holy ghost, so whole and perfect, asever it was. next, the nose of the cherubin, which appeared to saintfrances; with the payring of the naile of a seraphin; and one of theribbes of verbum caro, fastened to one of the windowes' covered withthe holy garments of the catholique faith. then he tooke me into adarke chappel, where he shewed me divers beames of the starre thatappeared to the three kings in the east. also a violl of saintmichaels sweate, when he combatted with the divell: and the jaw-boneof dead lazarus, with many other precious things beside. and because iwas liberall to him, giving him two of the plaines of monte morello,in the vulgare edition, and some of the chapters del caprezio, whichhe had long laboured in search of; he bestowed on me some of hisreliques. first, he gave me one of the eye-teeth of santa crux; anda litle violl, filled with some part of the sound of those belles,which hung in the sumptuous temple of salomon. next, he gave mee thefeather of the phoenix, which was with noah in the arke, as before itold you. and one of the woodden pattens, which the good saint gerrardde magnavilla used to weare in his travailes, and which i gave (notlong since) to gerrardo di bousy at florence, where it is respectedwith much devotion. moreover, he gave me a few of those coales,wherwith the phoenix of noah was roasted; all which things i broughtaway thence with me. now, most true it is, that my superiour wouldnever suffer mee to shew them any where, untill he was faithfullycertified, whether they were the same precious reliques, or no. butperceyving by sundrie myracles which they have wrought, and letters ofsufficient credence receyved from the reverend patriarch, that allis true, he hath graunted me permission to them, and because i woldnot trust any one with matters of such moment, i my selfe brought themhither with me. now i must tell you, that the feather of the samephoenix, i conveyed into a small cabinet or casket, because itshould not be bent or broken. and the coales wherewith the saidphoenix was roasted, i put into another casket, in all respects solike to the former, that many times i have taken one for another. asnow at this instant it hath bin my fortune: for, imagining that ibrought the casket with the feather, i mistooke my self, and broughtthe other with the coales. wherein doubtles i have not offended,because i am certaine, that we of our order do not any thing, but itis ordred by divine direction, and our blessed patron the lordebaron saint anthony. and so much the rather, because about a senighthence, the feast of saint anthony is to bee solemnized, against thepreparation whereof, and to kindle your zeale with the greaterfervencie: he put the casket with the coales into my hand, meaning,let you see the feather, at some more fitting season. and therefore myblessed sonnes and daughters, put off your bonnets, and come hitherwith devotion to looke upon them. but first let me tell you, whosoeveris marked by any of these coales, with the signe of the crosse: heor she shal live all this yeare happily, and no fire whatsoevershall come neere to touch or hurt them. so, singing a solemneantheme in the praise of s. anthony, he unveyled the casket, andshewed the coales openly.the simple multitude, having (with great admiration and reverence)a long while beheld them, they thronged in crouds to fryar onyon,giving him farre greater offerings, then before they had, andentreating him to marke them each after other. whereupon, he takingthe coales in his hand, began to marke their garments of white, andthe veyles on the womens heads, with crosses of no meane extendure:affirming to them, that the more the coales wasted with making thosegreat crosses, the more they still encreased in the casket, as oftenbefore hee had made triall.
in this manner, having crossed all the certaldanes (to his greatbenefit) and their abuse: he smiled at his sodaine and dexteriousdevise, in mockery of them, who thought to have made a scorne ofhim, by dispossessing him of the feather. for bragoniero andpizzino, being present at his learned predication, and having heardwhat a cunning shift he found, to come off cleanly, without theleast detection, and all delivered with such admirableprotestations: they were faine to forsake the church, least theyshould have burst with laughing.
but when all the people were parted and gone, they met friar onyonat his inne, where closely they discovered to him, what they had done,delivering him his feather againe: which the yeare following, didyeeld him as much money, as now the coales had done.
this novell affoorded equall pleasing to the whole companie, friaronyons sermon being much commended, but especially his longpilgrimage, and the reliques he had both seene, and brought homewith him. afterward, the queene perceiving, that her reigne had nowthe full expiration, graciously she arose, and taking the crownefrom off her owne head, placed [it] on the head of dioneus, saying. itis high time dioneus, that you should taste part of the charge andpaine, which poore women have felt and undergone in their soveraigntieand government: wherefore, be you our king, and rule us with suchawefull authority, that the ending of your dominion may yeelde usall contentment. dioneus being thus invested with the crowne, returnedthis answer.
i make no doubt (bright beauties) but you many times have seene asgood, or a better king among the chessemen, then i am. but yet of acertainty, if you would be obedient to me, as you ought in dutieunto a true king: i should grant you a liberall freedome of that,wherein you take the most delight, and without which, our choisestdesires can never be compleate. neverthelesse, i meane, that mygovernment shal be according to mine owne minde. so, causing themaster of the houshold to be called for, as all the rest were wontto do for conference with him: he gave him direction, for al thingsfitting the time of his regiment, and then turning to the ladies, thushe proceeded.
honest ladies, we have alreadie discoursed of variable devises,and so many severall manners of humane industry, concerning thebusines wherewith lacisca came to acquaint us: that her very words,have ministred me matter, sufficient for our morrowes conference, orelse i stand in doubt, that i could not have devised a more convenienttheame for us to talke on. she (as you have all heard) saide, thatshee had not anie neighbour, who came a true virgin to her husband,and added moreover, that she knew some others, who had beguiledtheir husbandes, in very cunning and crafty manner. but settingaside the first part, concerning the proofe of children, i conceivethe second to bee more apte for our intended argument. in whichrespect, my will is (seeing lacisca hath given us so good an occasion)that our discoursing to morow, may onely concerne such slye cunningand deceits, as women have heeretofore used, for satisfying their owneappetites, and beguiling their husbands, without their knowledge, orsuspition, and cleanly escaping with them, or no.
this argument seemed not very pleasing to the ladies, andtherefore they urged an alteration thereof, to some matter bettersuting with the day, and their discoursing: whereto thus heanswered. ladies, i know as well as your selves, why you would havethis instant argument altered: but to change me from it you have nopower, considering the season is such, as shielding all (both menand women) from medling with any dishonest action; it is lawfull forus to speake of what wee please. and know you not, that through thesad occasion of the time, which now overruleth us, the judges haveforsaken their venerable benches, the lawes (both divine and humane)ceasing, granting ample license to every one, to do what bestagreeth with the conservation of life? therefore, if your honestiesdoe straine themselves a little, both in thinking and speaking, notfor prosecution of any immodest deede, but onely for familiar andblamelesse entercourse: i cannot devise a more convenient ground, atleast that carrieth apparant reason, for reproofe of perils, toensue by any of you. moreover, your company, which hath bin mosthonest, since the first day of our meeting, to this instant: appearethnot any jot to be disgraced, by any thing either said or done, neithershal be (i hope) in the meanest degree.
and what is he, knowing your choise and vertuous dispositions, sopowerfull in their owne prevailing, that wanton words cannotmisguide your wayes, no nor the terror of death it selfe, that dareinsinuate a distempred thought? but admit, that some slight or shallowjudgements, hearing you (perhaps sometimes) talke of such amorousfollies, should therefore suspitiously imagine you to be faulty, orelse you would bee more sparing of speech? their wit and censure areboth alike, savouring rather of their owne vile nature, who wouldbrand others with their basebred imperfections. yet ther is anotherconsideration beside, of som great injury offered to mine honor, andwhereof i know not how you can acquit your selves.
i that have bin obedient to you all, and borne the heavy load ofyour businesse, having now (with full consent) created mee yourking, you would wrest the law out of my hands, and dispose of myauthoritie as you please. forbeare (gentle ladies) all frivolotissuspitions, more fit for them that are full of bad thoughts, then you,who have true vertue shining in your eyes; and therefore, let everyone freely speake their minde, according as their humors best pleaseththem.
when the ladies heard this, they made answer, that all should beeanswerable to his minde. whereupon, the king gave them all leave todispose of themselves till supper time. and because the sun was yetvery high, in regard all the re-counted novels had bin so short:dioneus went to play at the tables with another of the yong gentlemen,and madame eliza, having withdrawne the ladies aside, thus spakeunto them. during the time of our being heere, i have often benedesirous to let you see a place somwhat neere at hand, and which isuppose you have never seene, it being called the valley of ladies.till now, i could not finde any convenient time to bring youthither, the sunne continuing still aloft, which fitteth you withthe apter leysure, and the sight (i am sure) can no way discontentyou.
the ladies replyed, that they were all ready to walk with herthither: and calling one of their women to attend on them, they seton, without speaking a word to any of the men. and within the distanceof halfe a mile, they arrived at the valley of ladies, wherinto theyentred by a strait passage at the one side, from whence there issuedforth a cleare running river. and they found the saide valley to beeso goodly and pleasant, especially in that season, which was thehottest of all the yeare; as all the world was no where able toyeeld the like. and, as one of the said ladies (since then) related tomee, there was a plaine in the valley so directly round, as if ithad beene formed by a compasse, yet rather it resembled theworkmanship of nature, then to be made by the hand of man:containing in circuite somewhat more then the quarter of a mile,environed with sixe small hils, of no great height, and on each ofthem stood a little palace, shaped in the fashion of castles.
the ground-plot descending from those hils or mountaines, grew lesseand lesse by variable degrees, as wee observe at entering into ourtheaters, from the highest part to the lowest, succinctly to narrowthe circle by order. now, concerning these ground-plottes or littlemeadowes, those which the sun southward looked on, were full of vines,olive-trees, almond-trees, cherry-trees, and figge-trees, withdivers other trees beside, so plentifully bearing fruites, as youcould not discerne a hands bredth of losse. the other mountaines,whereon the northerne windes blow, were curiously covered with smallthickets or woods of oakes, ashes, and other trees so greene andstraite, as it was impossible to behold fairer. the goodly plaine itselfe, not having any other entrance, but where the ladies came in,was planted with trees of firre, cipresse, laurell, and pines; sosingularly growing in formall order, as if some artificiall or cunninghand had planted them, the sun hardly piercing through their branches,from the top to the bottome, even at his highest, or any part of hiscourse.
all the whole field was richly spred with grasse, and such varietyof delicate flowers, as nature yeilded out of her plenteousstore-house. but that which gave no lesse delight then any of therest, was a smal running brooke, descending from one of the vallies,that divided two of the little hils, and fell through a veine of theintire rocke it selfe, that the fall and murmure thereof was mostdelightfull to heare, seeming all the way in the descent, likequickesilver, weaving it selfe into artificiall workes, and arrivingin the plaine beneath, it was there receyved into a small channell,swiftly running through the midst of the plaine, to a place where itstayed, and shaped it selfe into a lake or pond, such as ourcitizens have in their orchards or gardens, when they please to makeuse of such a commodity.
this pond was no deeper, then to reach the breast of a man, andhaving no mud or soyle in it, the bottome thereof shewed like smallbeaten gravell, with prety pibble stones intermixed, which some thathad nothing else to do, would sit downe and count them as they lay, asvery easily they might. and not onely was the bottome thusapparantly seene, but also such plenty of fishes swimming every way,as the mind was never to be wearied in looking on them. nor was thiswater bounded in with any bankes, but onely the sides of the plainmedow, which made it appeare the more sightly, as it arose in swellingplenty. and alwayes as it superabounded in his course, least it shouldoverflow disorderly: it fell into another channell, which conveying italong the lower valley, ran forth to water other needfull places.
when the ladies were arrived in this goodly valley, and upon advisedviewing it, had sufficiently commended it: in regard the heat of thedry was great, the place tempting, and the pond free from sight ofany, they resolved there to bathe themselves. wherefore they sentthe waiting gentlewoman to have a diligent eye on t way where theyentered, least any one should chance to steale upon them. all seven ofthem being stript naked, into the water they went, which hid theirdelicate white bodies, like as a cleare glasse concealeth a damaskrose within it. so they being in the pond, and the water nothingtroubled by their being there, they found much prety pastime together,running after the fishes, to catch them with their hands, but theywere overquicke and cunning for them. after they had delightedthemselves there to their owne contentment, and were cloathed withtheir garments, as before: thinking it fit time for their returningbacke againe, least their over-long stay might give offence, theydeparted thence in an easie pace, dooing nothing else all the way asthey went, but extolling the valley of ladies beyond all comparison.
at the palace they arrived in a due houre, finding the threegentlemen at play, as they left them, to whom madame pampineapleasantly thus spake. now trust me gallants, this day wee have verycunningly beguiled you. how now? answered dioneus, begin you firstto act, before you speake? yes truly sir, replyed madame pampinea:
relating to him at large, from whence they came, what they haddone there, the beautie of the place, and the distance thence. theking (upon hir excellent report) being very desirous to see it;sodainely commaunded supper to be served in, which was no soonerended, but they and their three servants (leaving the ladies) walkedon to the valley, which when they had considered, no one of themhaving ever bin there before; they thought it to be the paradise ofthe world.
they bathed themselves there likewise, as the ladies formerlie haddone, and being re-vested, returned backe to their lodgings, becausedarke night drew on apace: but they found the ladies dauncing, to asong which madame fiammetta sung. when the dance was ended, theyentertained the time with no other discourse, but onely concerning thevalley of ladies, whereof they all spake liberally in commendations.whereupon, the king called the master of the houshold, giving himcommand, that (on the morrow) dinner should be readie betimes, andbedding to be thence carried, if any desired rest at mid-time of theday.
all this being done, variety of pleasing wines were brought,banquetting stuffe, and other dainties; after which they fell todauncing. and pamphilus, having receyved command to begin anespecial dance, the king turned himselfe unto madame eliza, speakingthus. faire lady, you have done me so much honour this day, as todeliver mee the crowne: in regard whereof, be you this night themistresse of the song: and let it be such as best may please yourselfe. whereunto madam eliza, with a modest blush arising in her face,replyed; that his will should be fulfilled, and then (with adeficate voyce) she beganne in this manner.
the song
the chorus sung by all
love, if i can scape free from forth thy holde,
beleeve it for a truth,
never more shall thy falshoode me enfolde.
when i was yong, i entred first thy fights,
supposing there to finde a solemne peace:
i threw off all my armes, and with delights
fed my poore hopes, as still they did encrease.
but like a tyrant, full of rancorous hate,
thou tookst advantage:
and i sought refuge, but it was too late.
love, if i can scape free, etc.
but being thus surprized in thy snares,
to my misfortune, thou madst me her slave;
was onely borne to feede me with despaires,
and keepe me dying in a living grave.
for i saw nothing dayly fore mine eyes,
but rackes and tortures:
from which i could not get in any wise.
love, if i can scape free, etc.
my sighes and teares i vented to the winde,
for none would heare or pittie my complaints;
my torments still encreased in this kinde,
and more and more i felt these sharpe restraints.
release me now at last from forth his hell.
asswage thy rigour,
delight not thus in cruelty to dwell.
love, if i can scape free, etc.
if this thou wilt not grant, be yet so kinde,
release me from those worse then servile bands,
which new vaine hopes have bred, wherein i finde;
such violent feares, as comfort quite withstands.
be now (at length) a little moov'd to pittie,
be it nere so little:
or in my death listen my swan-like dittie.
love, if i can scape free from forth thy holde,
beleeve it for a truth,
never more shall thy falshood me enfolde.
after that madame eliza had made an end of her song, which sheesealed up with an heart-breaking sigh: they all sate amazedlywondering at her moanes, not one among them being able toconjecture, what should be the reason of her singing in this manner.but the king being in a good and pleasing temper, calling tindaro,commaunded him to bring his bagge-pipe, by the sound whereof theydanced divers daunces: and a great part of the night being spent inthis manner, they all gave over, and departed to their chambers.
the induction to the seventh day
when the assembly being met together, and under the regiment of
dioneus: the discourses are directed, for the discoverie of such
policies and deceites, as women have used for beguiling of their
husbandes, either in respect of their love, or for the prevention
of some blame or scandall, escaping without sight, knowledge,
or otherwise
all the starres were departed out of east, but onely that, whichcommonly cal bright lucifer, the day-star, gracing the morning verygloriously: when the master of the household, being risen, went withall the provision, to the valley of ladies, to make everie thing indue and decent readines, according as his lord over-night hadcommanded him. after which departure of his, it was not long beforethe king arose, beeing awaked with the noise which the carriages made;and when he was up, the other two gentlemen and the ladies werequickly readie soone after.
such as were so disposed, were licensed by the king to take theirrest: and they that would not, he permitted them to their wontedpastimes, each according to their minds. but when they were risen fromsleepe, and the rest from their other exercises, it seemed to bemore then high time, that they should prepare for talke andconference. so, sitting downe on turky carpets, which were spredabroad on the green grasse, and close by the place where they haddined: the king gave command, that madam aemillia should firstbegin, whereto she willingly yeelding obedience, and expecting suchsilent attention, as formerly had bin, thus she began.
the seventh day, the first novell
reprehending the simplicity of some sottish husbands: and
discovering the wanton subtilties of some women, to compasse
their unlawfull desires
john of lorraine heard one knocke at his doore in the night time,whereuppon he awaked his wife monna tessa. she made him beleeve,that it was a spirit which knocked at the doore, and so they arose,going both together to conjure the spirit with a prayer; andafterwardes, they heard no more knocking.
my gracious lord (quoth madame aemillia) it had bene a matter highlypleasing to mee, that any other (rather then my selfe) should havebegun to speake of this argument, which it hath pleased you to apoint.but seeing it is your highnesse pleasure, that i must make a passageof assurance for all the rest; i will not be irregular, becauseobedience is our cheefe article. i shall therefore (gracious ladies)strive, to speake something, which may bee advantageable to youheereafter, in regard, that if other women bee as fearfull as we,especially of spirits, of which all our sexe have generally bintimorous (although, upon my credite, i know not what they are, norever could meete with any, to tell me what they be) you may, by thediligent observation of my novell: learne a wholsome and holyprayer, very availeable, and of precious power, to conjure and drivethem away, whensoever they shall presume to assault you in any place.
there dwelt sometime in florence, and in the street of saintbrancazio, a woollen weaver, named john of lorrayne; a man morehappy in his art, then wise in any thing else beside: because,savouring somewhat of the gregorie, and (in very deede)
little lesse then an ideot; hee was many times made captain of thewoollen weavers, in the quarters belonging to santa maria novella, andhis house was the schoole or receptacle, for all their meetings andassemblies. he had divers other petty offices beside, by the gnity andauthority whereof, hee supposed himselfe much exalted or elevated,above the common pitch of other men. and this humour became the moretractable to him, because he addicted himselfe oftentimes (as beinga man of an easie inclination) to be a benefactor to the holyfathers of santa maria novella, giving (beside his other charitablealmes) to some one a paire of breeches, to another a hood, and toanother a whole habit. in reward whereof, they taught him (by heart)many wholsome prayers, as the pater noster in the vulgar tongue; thesong of saint alexis; the lamentations of saint bernard, the hymneof madame matilda, and many other such like matters, which he keptcharily, and repeated usually, as tending to the salvation of hissoule.
this man, had a very faire and lovely wife, named monna tessa, thedaughter of manuccio della cuculia, wise and well advised; who knowingthe simplicity of her husband, and affecting frederigo di neripegolotti, who was a comely yong gentleman, fresh, and in the floureof his time, even as she was, therefore they agreed the bettertogether. by meanes of her chambermaid, frederigo and shee met oftentogether, at a countrie farme of john of lorraynes, which hee hadneere to florence, and where she used to lodge all the summer time,called camerata, whether john resorted somtimes to supper, and lodgefor a night, returning home againe to his city house the next morning;yet often he would stay there longer with his owne companions.
frederigo, who was no meane man in his mistresses favor, andtherefore these private meetings the more welcome to him; received asummons or assignation from her, to be there on such a night, when hirhusband had no intent of comming thither. there they supped merrilytogether, and (no doubt) did other things, nothing appertaining to ourpurpose, she both acquainting, and well instructing him, in a dozen(at the least) of her husbands devout prayers. nor did shee make anyaccount, or frederigo either, that this should be the last time oftheir meeting, because (indeede) it was not the first: and therforethey set downe an order and conclusion together (because thechambermaide must be no longer the messenger) in such manner as youshall heare.
frederigo was to observe especially, that alwayes when hee went orcame from his owne house, which stood much higher then john oflorraynes did, to looke upon a vine, closely adjoyning to her house,where stood the scull of an asses head, advanced upon an high pole;and when the face thereof looked towards florence, he might safelycome, it being an assured signe, that john kept at home. and if hefound the doore fast shut, he should softly knocke three severalltimes, and thereon bee admitted entrance. but if the face stoodtowards fiesola; then he might not come, for it was the signe of johnsbeing there, and then there might be no medling at all.
having thus agreed upon this conclusion, and had many merry meetingstogether: one night above the rest, when frederigo was appointed tosuppe with monna tessa, who had made ready two fat capons, drest inmost dainty and delicate manner: it fell out so unfortunately, thatjohn (whose kue was not to come that night) came thither very late,yet before frederigo, wherewith she being not a little offended,gave john a slight supper, of lard, bacon, and such like coarseprovision, because the other was kept for a better guest. in the meanetime, and while john was at supper, the maide (by her mistressesdirection) had conveighed the two capons, with boyled eggs, breadand a bottle of wine (all folded up in a faire cleane table cloth)into her garden, that a passage to it, without entering into thehouse, and where shee had divers times supt with frederigo. shefurther willed the maide, to set all those things under a peachtree, which adjoyned to the fields side: but, so angry she was ather husbands unexpected comming, that shee forgot to bid her tarriethere, till frederigoes comming, and to tell him of johns being there:as also, to take what he found prepared readie for his supper.
john and she being gone to bed together, and the maide likewise,it was not long after, before frederigo came, and knocking once softlyat the doore, which was very neere to their lodging chamber, johnheard the noise, and so did his wife. but to the end, that johnmight not have the least scruple of suspition, she seemed to be fastasleepe; and frederigo pausing a while, according to the orderdirected, knockt againe the second time. john wondering thereat verymuch, jogd his wife a litle, and saide to her: tessa, hearest thounothing? methinkes one knocketh at our doore. monna tessa, who wasbetter acquainted with the knocke, then plaine honest meaning johnwas, dissembling as if shee awaked out of a drowsie dreame, saide:alas husband, dost thou know what this is? in the name of ourblessed ladie, be not affraid, this is but the spirit which haunts ourcountrey houses, whereof i have often told thee, and it hath manytimes much dismayed me, living heere alone without thy comfort. nay,such hath bin my feare, that in divers nights past, so soone as iheard the knockes: i was feigne to hide my selfe in the beddeover-head and eares (as we usually say) never daring to be so bold, asto looke out, untill it was broad open day. arise good wife (quothjohn) and if it be such a spirit of the countrey, as thou talkestof, never be affraid; for before we went to bed, i said the telucis,the intemerata, with many other good prayers beside. moreover, imade the signe of the crosse at every corner of our bed, in the nameof the father, son, and holy ghost, so that no doubt at all needs tobe made, of any power it can have to hurt or touch us.
monna tessa, because (perhaps) frederigo might receive some othersuspition, and so enter into distaste of her by anger or offence:determined to arise indeede, and to let him covertly understand,that john was there, and therefore saide to her husband. beleeve mejohn, thy counsell is good, and every one of thy words hath wisedomein it: but i hold it best for our owne safety, thou being heere;that wee should conjure him quite away, to the end he may never morehaunt our house. conjure him wife? quoth john, by what meanes? andhow? bee patient good man (quoth tessa) and i will enstruct thee, ihave learned an excellent kinde of conjuration; for, the last weeke,when i went to procure the pardons at fiesola, one of the holy reclusenuns, who (indeede john) is my indeered sister and friend, and themost sanctimonius in life of them all; perceiving me to be troubledand terrified by spirits; taught me a wholsome and holy prayer, andprotested withall, that shee had often made experiment thereof, beforeshe became a recluse, and found it (alwayes) a present helpe to her.yet never durst i adventure to essay it, living heere by my selfeall alone: but honest john, seeing thou art heere with me, we willgo both together, and conjure this spirit. john replyed, that he wasvery willing; and being both up, they went fayre and softly to thedoore, where frederigo stoode still without, and was growne somewhatsuspitious of his long attendance.
when they were come to the doore, monna tessa said to john: thoumust cough and spet, at such time as i shall bid thee. well (quothjohn) i will not faile you. immediately she beganne her prayer in thismanner.
spirit, that walkst thus in the night,
poore countrey people to affright:
thou hast mistane thy marke and ayme,
the head stood right, but john home came,
and therefore thou must packe away,
for i have nothing else to say:
but to my garden get the gone,
under the peach-tree stands alone,
there shalt thou finde two capons drest,
and egges laide in mine owne hennes nest,
bread, and a bottle of good wine,
all wrapt up in a cloath most fine.
is not this good goblins fare?
packe and say you have your share;
not doing harme to john or me,
who this night keepes me companie.
no sooner had she ended her devoute conjuring prayer, but shesaide to her husband: now john, cough and spet: which john accordinglydid. and frederigo, being all this while without, hearing her wittyconjuration of a spirit, which he himselfe was supposed to be, beingridde of his former jealous suspition: in the middst of all hismelancholy, could very hardly refraine from laughing, the jestappeared so pleasing to him: but when john cought and spet, softlyhe said to himselfe: when next thou spetst, spet out all thy teeth.
the woman having three severall times conjured the spirite, insuch manner as you have already heard; returned to bed againe with herhusband: and frederigo, who came as perswaded to sup with her, beingsupperlesse all this while; directed by the words of monna tessa inhir praier, went into the garden. at the foot of the peach-tree, therehe found the linnen cloth, with the two hot capons, bread, egges,and a bottle of wine in it, all which he carried away with him, andwent to supper at better leysure. oftentimes afterward, upon othermeetings of frederigo and she together, they laughed heartily at herenchantment, and the honest beleefe of silly john.
i cannot deny, but that some do affirme, that the woman had turnedthe face of the asses head towards fiesola, and a country travailerpassing by the vine, having a long piked staffe on his necke: thestaffe (by chance) touched the head, and made it turne divers timesabout, and in the end faced florence, which being the cal forfrederigoes comming, by this meanes he was disappointed. in likemanner some say, that monna tessaes prayer for conjuring the spirit,was in this order.
spirit, spirit, thy way,
and come againe some other day.
it was not i that turnd the head,
but some other. in our bed
are john and i: go from our dore,
and see thou trouble us no more.
so that frederigo departed thence, both with the losse of his labourand supper. but a neighbour of mine, who is a woman of good yeares,told me, that both the one and other were true, as she her selfeheard, when she was a little girle. and concerning the latteraccident, it was not to john of lorrayne, but to another, named johnde nello, that dwelt at s. peters gate, and of the same professionas john of lorrayne was. wherefore (faire ladies) it remaineth in yourowne choice, to entertain which of the two prayers you please, or bothtogether if you will: for they are of extraordinary vertue in suchstrange occurrences, as you have heeretofore heard, and (upon doubt)may prove by experience. it shall not therefore be amisse for you,to learne them both by hart, for (peradventure) they may stand youin good sted, if ever you chance to have the like occasion.
the seventh day, the second novell
wherein is declared, what hard and narrow shifts and distresses,
such as bee seriously linked in love, are many times enforced to
undergo: according as their owne wit, and capacitie of their
surprizers, drive them to in extremities
peronella hid a yong man her friend and lover, under a great brewingfat, upon the sodaine returning home of her husband; who told her,that hee had solde the saide fat and brought him that bought it, tocary it away. peronella replyed, that shee had formerly solde itunto another, who was now underneath it, to see whether it werewhole and sound, or no. whereupon, he being come forth from underit; she caused her husband to make it neate and cleane, and so thelast buyer carried it away.
not without much laughter and good liking, was the tale of madameaemillia listened unto, and both the prayers commended to be sound andsoveraigne: but it being ended, the king commaunded philostratus, thathee should follow next in order, whereupon thus he began.
deare ladies, the deceites used by men towards your sexe, butespecially husbands, have bene so great and many, as when it hathsometime happened, or yet may, that husbands are requited in theself-same kinde: you need not finde fault at any such accident, eitherby knowledge thereof afterward, or hearing the same reported by anyone; but rather you should referre it to generall publication, tothe end, that immodest men may know, and finde it for trueth, thatif they have apprehension and capacity; women are therein not a joteinferiour to them. which cannot but redound to your great benefite,because, when any one knoweth, that another is as cunning andsubtile as himselfe; he will not be so rashly adventurous indeceite. and who maketh any doubt, that if those sleights and trickes,whereof this dayes argument may give us occasion to speake, shouldafterwardes be put in execution by men: would it not minister justreason, of punishing themselves for beguiling you, knowing, that (ifyou please) you have the like abilitie in your owne power? mine intenttherefore is to tell you, what a woman (though but of meanequalitie) did to her husband, upon a sodaine, and in a moment (as itwere) for her owne safety.
not long since, there lived in naples, an honest meane man, whodid take to wife, a fayre and lustie young woman, being namedperonella.-he professing the trade of a mason, and shee carding andspinning, maintained themselves in a reasonable condition, abating andabounding as their fortunes served. it came to passe, that acertayne young man, well observing the beauty and good parts ofperonella, became much addicted in affection towardes her: and byhis often and secret sollicitations, which he found not to beunkindely entertayned; his successe proved answerable to his hope,no unindifferencie appearing in their purposes, but where her estateseemed weakest, his supplies made an addition of more strength.
now, for their securer meeting, to stand cleare from all matter ofscandal or detection, they concluded in this order between themselves.lazaro, for so was peronellaes husband named, being an earely riserevery morning, either to seeke for worke, or to effect it beingundertaken: this amorous friend being therewith acquainted, andstanding in some such convenient place, where hee could see lazaroesdeparture from his house, and yet himselfe no way discerned; poorelazaro was no sooner gone, but presently he enters the house, whichstood in a verie solitarie street, called the avorio. many morningshad they thus met together, to their no meane delight andcontentation, till one especial morning among the rest, when lazarowas gone forth to worke, and striguario (so was the amorous youngman named) visiting peronella in the house: upon a verie urgentoccasion, lazaro returned backe againe, quite contrary to his formerwont, keeping foorth all day, and never comming home till night.
finding his doore to be fast lockt, and he having knockt softlieonce or twice, he spake in this manner to himselfe. fortune i thankethee, for albeit thou hast made mee poore, yet thou hast bestowed abetter blessing on me, in matching me with so good, honest, and lovinga wife. behold, though i went early out of my house, her selfe hathrisen in the cold to shut the doore, to prevent the entrance oftheeves, or any other that might offend us. peronella having heardwhat her husband sayde, and knowing the manner of his knocke, saidfearfully to striguario. alas deare friend, what shall wee doe? i amlittle lesse then a dead woman: for, lazaro my husband is come backeagain, and i know not what to do or say. he never returned in thisorder before now, doubtlesse, hee saw when you entred the doore; andfor the safety of your honour and mine: creepe under this brewing fat,till i have opened the doore, to know the reason of his so soonereturning.
striguario made no delaying of the matter, but got himselfe closelieunder the fat, and peronella opening the doore for her husbandsenterance, with a frowning countenance, spake thus unto him. whatmeaneth this so early returning home againe this morning? itseemeth, thou intendest to do nothing to day, having brought backe thytooles in thy hands? if such be thine intent, how shall we live? whereshal we have bread to fill our bellies? dooest thou thinke, that iwill suffer thee to pawne my gowne, and other poore garments, asheeretofore thou hast done? i that card and spinne both night and day,till i have worne the flesh from my fingers; yet all will hardly findeoyle to maintaine our lampe. husband, husband, there is not oneneighbour dwelling by us, but makes a mockerie of me, and tels meplainly, that i may be ashamed to drudge and moyle as i do;wondering not a little, how i am able to endure it; and thou returnesthome with thy hands in thy hose, as if thou hadst no worke at all todo this day.
having thus spoken, she fell to weeping, and then thus beganagain. poore wretched woman as i am, in an unfortunate houre was iborne, and in a much worse, when i was made thy wife. i could have hada proper, handsome yong man; one, that would have maintained mee braveand gallantly: but, beast as i was, to forgoe my good, and cast myselfe away on such a beggar as thou art, and whom none wold havehad, but such an asse as i. other women live at hearts ease, and injollity, have their amorous friends and loving paramours, yea, one,two, three at once, making their husbands looke like a moone cressent,wheron they shine sun-like, with amiable lookes, because they know nothow to helpe it: when i (poore foole) live heere at home a miserablelife, not daring once to dreame of such follies, an innocent soule,heartlesse and harmelesse.
many times, sitting and sighing to my selfe: lord, thinke i, of whatmettall am i made? why should not i have a friend in a corner,aswell as others have? i am flesh and blood, as they are, not madeof brasse or iron, and therefore subject to womens frailty. would thoushouldest know it husband, and i tell it thee in good earnest; that ifi would doe ill, i could quickely finde a friend at a neede.gallants there are good store, who (of my knowledge) love medearely, and have made me very large and liberall promises, ofgolde, silver, jewels, and gay garments, if i would extend them theleast favour. but my heart will not suffer me, i never was thedaughter of such a mother, as had so much as a thought of suchmatters: no, i thanke our blessed ladie, and s. friswid for it: andyet thou returnest home againe, when thou shouldst be at worke.
lazaro, who stoode all this while like a well-beleeving logger-head,demurely thus answered. alas good wife! i pray you bee not so angry, inever had so much as an ill thought of you, but know wel enough whatyou are, and have made good proofe thereof this morning. understandtherefore patiently (sweet wife) that i went forth to my work as daylyi use to do, little dreaming (as i thinke you doe not) that it hadbene holyday. wife, this is the feast day of saint galeone; whereon wemay in no wise worke, and this is the reason of my so soone returning.neverthelesse (dear wife) i was not carelesse of our housholdprovision: for, though we worke not, yet we must have foode, which ihave provided for more then a moneth. wife, i remembred the brewingfat, whereof we have little or no use at all, but rather it is atrouble to the house, then otherwise. i met with an honest friend, whostayeth without at the doore, to him i have sold the fat for tengigliatoes, and he tarrieth to take it away with him.
how husband? replied peronella, why now i am worse offended thenbefore. thou that art a man, walkest every where, and shouldst beexperienced in worldly affaires: wouldst thou bee so simple, as tosell such a brewing fat for ten gigliatoes? why, i that am a pooreignorant woman, a house dove, sildome going out of my doore: have soldit already for twelve gigliatoes, to a very honest man, who (even alittle before thy comming home) came to me, we agreed on the bargaine,and he is now underneath the fat, to see whether it be sound or no.when credulous lazaro heard this, he was better contented then ever,and went to him that taried at the doore, saying. good man, you maygoe your way, for, whereas you offered me but ten gigliatoes for thefat, my loving wife hath sold it for twelve, and i must maintaine whatshee hath done: so the man departed, and the variance ended.
peronella then saide to her husband. seeing thou art come home soluckily, helpe me to lift up the fat, that the man may come foorth,and then you two end the bargaine together. striguario, who thogh hewas mewed up under the tubbe, had his eares open enough; and hearingthe witty excuse of peronella, tooke himselfe free from futurefeare: and being come from under the fat, pretending also, as if hehad herd nothing, nor saw lazaro, looking round about him, said. whereis this good woman? lazaro stepping forth boldly like a man,replyed: heere am i, what would you have sir? thou? quothstriguario, what art thou? i ask for the good wife, with whom i mademy match for the fat. honest gentleman (answered lazaro) i am thathonest womans husband, for lacke of a better, and i will maintainewhatsoever my wife hath done.
i crie you mercie sir, replyed striguario, i bargained with yourwife for this brewing fat, which i finde to be whole and sound: onlyit is uncleane within, hard crusted with some dry soile upon it, whichi know not well how to get off, if you will be the meanes of making itcleane, i have the money heere ready for it. for that sir (quothperonella) take you no care, although no match at all had beenemade, what serves my husband for, but to make it cleane? yesforsooth sir, answered sily lazaro, you shall have it neate and cleanebefore you pay the mony.
so, stripping himselfe into his shirt lighting a candle, andtaking tooles fit for the purpose; the fat was whelmed over him, andhe being within it, wrought untill he sweated, with scraping andscrubbing. so that these poore lovers, what they could notaccomplish as they wold, necessity enforced them to performe as theymight. and peronella, looking in at the vent-hole, where the liquorrunneth forth for the meshing; seemed to instruct her husband in thebusinesse, as espying those parts where the fat was fowlest, saying:there, there lazaro, tickle it there, the gentleman payes well for it,and is worthy to have it: but see thou do thy selfe no harme goodhusband. i warrant thee wife, answered lazaro, hurt not your selfewith leaning your stomacke on the fat, and leave the cleansing of itto me. to be breefe, the brewing fat was neatly cleansed, peronellaand striguario both well pleased, the money paide, and honestmeaning lazaro not discontented.
the seventh day, the third novell
serving as a friendly advertisement to married women, that monks,
friars, and priests may be none of their gossips, in
regard of unavoydable perilles ensuing thereby
friar reynard, falling in love with a gentlewoman, wife to a manof good account; found the meanes to become her gossip. afterward,he being conferring closely with her in her chamber, and her husbandcoming sodainly thither: she made him beleeve, that he came thitherfor no other end; but to cure his god-sonne by a charme, of adangerous disease which he had by wormes.
philostratus told not this tale so covertly, concerning lazarossimplicity, and peronellaes witty policy; but the ladies found aknot in the rush, and laughed not a little, at his queint manner ofdiscoursing it. but upon the conclusion, the king looking upon madameliza, willed her to succeede next, which as willingly she granted,and thus began. pleasant ladies, the charme or conjuration wherwithmadam aemillia laid her night-walking spirit, maketh me remember anovell of another enchantment; which although it carrieth notcommendation equall to the other, yet i intend to report it, becauseit suteth with our present purpose, and i cannot sodainly befurnisht with another, answerable thereto in nature.
you are to understand then, that there lived in siena, a proper yongman, of good birth and well friended, being named reynard. earnestlyhe affected his neere dwelling neighbour, a beautifull gentlewoman,and wife to a man of good esteeme: of whom hee grew halfe perswaded,that if he could (without suspition) compasse private conferencewith her, he should reach the height of his amorous desires. yetseeing no likely meanes wherewith to further his hope, and sheebeing great with childe, he resolved to become a godfather to thechilde, at such time as it should be brought to christening. and beinginwardly acquainted with her husband, who was named credulano; suchfamiliar intercourses passed betweene them, both of reynards kindeoffer, and credulanoes as courteous acceptance, that hee was set downefor a gossippe.
reynard being thus embraced for madam agnesiaes gossip, and thisproving the onely colourable meanes, for his safer permission ofspeech with her, to let her now understand by word of mouth, what longbefore she collected by his lookes and behaviour: it fell out no waybeneficiall to him, albeit agnesia seemed not nice or scrupulous inhearing, yet she had a more precious care of her honor. it came topasse, within a while after (whether by seeing his labour vainlyspent, or some other urgent occasion moving him thereto, i know not)reynard would needs enter into religion, and whatsoever strictnesse orausteritie hee found to be in that kinde of life, yet he determined topersevere therein, whether it were for his good or ill. and althoughwithin a short space, after he was thus become a religious monke,hee seemed to forget the former love which he bare to his gossipagnesia, and divers other enormous vanities beside: yet let me tellyou, successe of time tutord him in them again(!; and, without anyrespect to his poore ho habite, but rather in contempt thereof (asit were) he tooke an especiall delight, in wearing garments of muchricher esteeme, yet favoured by the same monasticall profession,appearing (in all respects) like a court-minion or favourite, of asprightly and poeticall disposition, for composing verses, sonnets,and canzons, singing them to sundry excellent instruments, and yet notgreatly curious of his company, so they were some of the best, andmadame agnesia one, his former gossip.
but why doe i trouble my selfe, in talking thus of our so latelyconverted friar, holy father reynard, when they of longer standing,and reputed meerely for saints in life, are rather much more vile thenhee? such is the wretched condition of this world, that they shame not(fat, foggie, and nastie abbey-lubbers) to shew how full-fedde theylive in their cloysters, with cherry cheekes, and smooth shininglookes, gay and gaudy garments, far from the least expression ofhumility, not walking in the streets like doves: but high-crested likecockes, with well cramd gorges. nay, which is worse, if you did butsee their chambers furnished with gally-pots of electuaries,precious unguents, apothecary boxes, filled with variousconfections, conserves, excellent perfumes, and other goodly glassesof artificiall oyles and waters: beside rundlets and small barrelsfull of greeke wine, muscatella, lachrime christi, and other such likemost precious wines, so that (to such as see them) they seeme not tobee chambers of religious men; but rather apothecaries shoppes, orappertaining to druggists, grocers, or perfumers.
it is no disgrace to them to be gowty; because when other men knowit not, they alledge, that strict fasting, feeding on grosse meates(though never so little,) continuall studying, and such likerestraints from the bodies freer exercise, maketh them subject to manyinfirmities. and yet, when any one of them chanceth to fall sicke, thephysitian must minister no such counsell to them, as chastity,abstinence from voluptuous meats, discipline of the body, or any ofthose matters appertaining to a modest religious life. for, concerningthe plaine, vulgar, and plebeian people, these holy fathers areperswaded, that they know nothing really belonging to asanctimonious life; as long watching, praying, discipline and fasting,which (in themselves) are not able, to make men look leane,wretched, and pale. because saint dominicke, saint fraunces, anddivers other holy saints beside, observed the selfesame religiousorders and constitutions, as now their carefull successors do.moreover, in example of those fore-named saints, who went welcloathed, though they had not three garments for one, nor made ofthe finest woollen excellent cloath: but rather of the very coarsestof all other, and of the common ordinary colour, to expell cold onely,but not to appear brave or gallant, deceyving thereby infinitesimple credulous soules, whose purses (neverthelesse) are their bestpay-masters.
but leave we this, and returne wee backe to vertuous fryarreynard, who falling again& to his former appetites; became an oftenvisitant of his gossip agnesia, and now hee had learned such ablushlesse kinde of boldnesse; that he durst be more instant withher (concerning his privie sute) then ever formerly he had bin, yeaeven to solicite the enjoying of his immodest desires. the goodgentlewoman, seeing her selfe so importunately pursued, and friarreynard appearing now (perhappes) of sweeter and more delicatecomplexion, the at his entrance into religion: at a set time of hissecret communing with her; she answered him in as apt tearmes, as theyuse to do, who are not greatly sqeamish, in granting mattersdemanded of them.
why how now friar reynard? quoth shee, doe godfathers use to movesuch questions? whereto the friar thus replyed. madam, when i havelaide off this holy habite (which is a matter very easie for mee todo) i shall seeme in your eye, in all respects made like anotherman, quite from the course of any religious life. agnesia, bitingthe lip with a prety smile, said; o my faire starres! you will neverbee so unfriendly to me. what? you being my gossip, would you haveme consent unto such a sinne? our blessed lady shield mee, for myghostly father hath often told me, that it is utterly unpardonable:but if it were, i feare too much confiding on mine owne strength.gossip, the friar, you speake like a foole, and feare (in this case)is wholly frivolous, especially, when the motions mooved by such anone as my selfe, who (upon repentance) can grant you pardon andindulgence presently. but i pray you let mee aske you one question,who is the neerest kinsman to your son; either i, that stood at thefont for his baptisme, or your husband that begot him? the lady madeanswere, that it was her husband. you say very true gossip, replyedthe friar, and yet notwithstanding, doth not your husband (both atboord and bed) enjoy the sweet benefit of your company? yes, saidthe lady, why shold he not? then lady (quoth reynard) i, who am not soneere a kinsman to your sonne, as your husband is, why may ye notafford mee the like favour, as you do him? agnesia, who was nologitian, and therefore could not stand on any curious answer,especially being so cuningly moved; beleeved, or rather made shew ofbeleeving, that the godfather said nothing but truth, and thusanswered. what woman is she (gossip) that knoweth how to answer yourstrange speeches? and, how it came to passe, i know not, but such anagreement passed betweene them, that, for once onely (so it mightnot infrindge the league of gossip-ship, but that title to countenancetheir further intent) such a favour should be affoorded, so it mightstand cleare from suspition.
an especiall time being appointed, when this amorous combateshould be fought in loves field, friar reynard came to his gossipshouse, where none being present to hinder his purpose, but onely thenursse which attended on the child, who was an indifferent faire andproper woman: his holy brother that came thither in his company(because friars were not allowed to walke alone) was sent aside withher into the pigeon loft, to enstruct her in a new kinde of paternoster, lately devised in their holy convent. in the meane while, asfriar reynard and agnesia were entring into hir chamber, she leadingher little son by the hand, and making fast the doore for their bettersafety: the friar laide by his holie habit, cowle, hood, booke, andbeads, to bee (in all respects) as other men were. no sooner were theythus entred the chamber, but her husband credulano, being come intothe house, and unseen of any, staid not till he was at the chamberdoore, where hee knockt, and called for his wife.
she hearing his voice: alas gossip (quoth she) what shall i do? myhusband knocketh at the doore, and now he will perceive the occasionof our so familiar acquaintance. reynard being stript into histrusse and straite strouses, began to tremble and quake exceedingly. iheare your husbands tongue gossip, said he, and seeing no harme as yethath bin done, if i had but my garments on againe; wee would haveone excuse or other to serve the turne, but till then you may not openthe doore. as womens wits are sildome gadding abroad, when anynecessitie concerneth them at home: even so agnesia, being sodainlyprovided of an invention, both how to speake and carry her selfe inthis extreamitie, saide to the friar. get on your garments quickely,and when you are cloathed, take your little god-son in your armes, andlistning wel what i shall say, shape your answeres according to mywords, and then refer the matter to me. credulano had scarsely endedhis knocking, but agnesia stepping to the doore said: husband, icome to you. so she opened the doore, and (going forth to him) witha chearefull countenance thus spake. beleeve me husband, you could nothave come in a more happy time, for our yong son was sudainlyextreamly sicke, and (as good fortune would have it) our loving gossipreynard chanced to come in; and questionlesse, but by his good prayersand other religious paynes, we had utterly lost our childe, for he hadno life left in him.
credulano, being as credulous as his name imported, seemed readyto swoune with sodaine conceit: alas good wife (quoth he) how hapnedthis? sit downe sweet husband said she, and i wil tell you al. ourchild was sodainly taken with a swouning, wherein i being unskilful,did verily suppose him to be dead, not knowing what to doe, or say. bygood hap, our gossip reynard came in, and taking the childe up inhis armes, said to me. gossip, this is nothing else but wormes inthe bellie of the childe, which ascending to the heart, must needskill the child, without all question to the contrary. but be of goodcomfort gossip, and feare not, for i can charme them in such sort,that they shall all die, and before i depart hence, you shall see yourson as healthfull as ever. and because the maner of this charm is ofsuch nature, that it required prayer and exorcising in two places atonce: nurse went up with his holye brother into our pigeon loft, toexercise their devotion there, while we did the like heere. for nonebut the mother of the childe must bee present at such a mystery, norany enter to hinder the operation of the charme; which was thereason of making fast the chamber doore. you shall see husband anonthe childe, which is indifferently recovered in his armes, and ifnurse and his holy brother were returned from theyr meditations; hesaith, that the charme would then be fully effected: for the childbeginneth to looke chearefull and merry.
so deerely did credulano love the childe, that hee verilybeleeved, what his wife had saide, never misdoubting any othertreachery: and, lifting up his eyes, with a vehement sigh, said. wife,may not i goe in and take the child into my armes? oh no, not yet goodhusband (quoth she) in any case, least you should overthrow all thatis done. stay but a little while, i will go in againe, and if allbee well, then will i call you. in went agnesia againe, making thedoore fast after her, the fryar having heard all the passedspeeches, by this time he was fitted with his habite, and taking thechilde in his armes, he said to agnesia. gossip methought i heard yourhusbands voice, is hee at your chamber doore? yes gossip reynard(quoth credulano without, while agnesia opened the doore, and admittedhim entrance) indeede it is i. come in sir, i pray you, replyed thefriar, and heere receive your childe of mee, who was in greatdanger, of your ever seeing him any more alive. but you must takeorder, to make an image of waxe, agreeing with the stature of thechilde, to be placed on the altar before the image of s. frances, bywhose merites the childe is thus restored to health.
the childe, beholding his father, made signes of comming to him,rejoycing merrily, as yong infants use to do, and credulano claspinghim in his armes, wept with conceite of joy, kissing him infinitely,and heartily thanking his gossip reynard, for the recovery of hisgod-son. the friars brotherly companion, who had given sufficientenstructions to the nurse, and a small purse full of sisters whitethred, which a nunne (after shrift) had bestowed on him, upon thehusbands admittance into the chamber (which they easily heard) came inalso to them, and seeing all in very good tearmes, they holpe tomake a joyfull conclusion, the brother saying to friar reynard:brother, i have finished all those foure jaculatory prayers, which youcommanded me.
brother, answered reynard, you have a better breath then i, and yoursuccesse hath prooved happier then mine, for before the arrivall of mygossip credulano, i could accomplish but two jaculatory prayers onely.but it appeareth, that we have both prevailed in our devout desire,because the childe is perfectly cured. credulano calling for wineand good cheare, feasted both the friars very jocondly, and thenconducting them forth of his house, without any furtherintermission, caused the childs image of waxe to be made, and sentit to be placed on the altar of saint frances, among many other thelike oblations.
the seventh day, the fourth novell
wherein is manifested, that the malice and subtilty of
woman, surpasseth all the art or wit in man
tofano in the night season, did locke his wife out of his house, andshee not prevailing to get entrance againe, by all the entreatiesshe could possiblie use: made him beleeve that she had throwne herselfe into a well, by casting a great stone into the same well. tofanohearing the fall of the stone into the well, and being perswadedthat it was his wife indeed; came forth of his house, and ran to thewelles side. in the meane while, his wife gotte into the house, madefast the doore against her husband, and gave bim many reproachfullspeeches.
so soone as the king perceyved, that the novell reported by madameeliza was finished: hee turned himselfe to madame lauretta, and toldher as his pleasure, that she should now begin the next, whereto sheyeelded in this manner. o love: what, and how many are thyprevailing forces? how straunge are thy foresights? and howadmirable thine attempts? where is, or ever was the philosopher orartist, that could enstruct the wiles, escapes, preventions, anddemonstrations, which sodainly thou teachest such, as are thy aptand understanding schollers indeede? certaine it is, that thedocuments and eruditions of all other whatsoever, are weak, or of noworth, in respect of thine: as hath notably appeared, by theremonstrances already past, and whereto (worthy ladies) i wil addeanother of a simple woman, who taught her husband such a lesson, asshee never learned of any, but love himselfe.
there dwelt sometime in arezzo (which is a faire village of tuscany)a rich man, named tofano, who enjoyed in marriage a young beautifullwoman, called cheta: of whom (without any occasion given, or reasonknowne to himselfe) he became exceeding- jealous. which his wifeperceyving, she grew much offended thereat, and tooke it in greatscorne, that she should be servile to so vile and slavish a condition.oftentimes, she demanded of him, from whence this jealousie in himreceived originall, he having never seene or heard of any; he couldmake her no other answer, but who his owne bad humour suggested, anddrove him every day (almost) to deaths doore, by feare of that whichno way needed. but, whether as a just scourge for this his grossefolly, or a secret decree, ordained to him by fortune and the fates, iam not able to distinguish: it came so to passe, that a younggallant made meanes to enjoy her favour, and she was so discreetlywise in judging of his worthinesse; that affection passed so farremutually betweene them, as nothing wanted, but effects to answerewords, suited with time and place convenient, for which order wastaken as best they might, yet to stand free from all suspition.
among many other evill conditions, very frequent and familiar in herhusband tofano; he tooke a great delight in drinking, which not onlyhe held to be a commendable quality, but was alwaies so oftensolicited thereto: that cheta her selfe began to like and allow itin him, feeding his humor so effectually, with quaffing and carowsing,that (at any time when she listed) she could make him bowsie beyondeall measure: and leaving him sleeping in this drunkennesse, wouldalwayes get her selfe to bed. by helpe heereof, she compassed thefirst familiarity with her friend, yea, divers times after, asoccasion served: and so confidently did she builde on her husbandsdrunkennesse, that not onely shee adventured to bring her friendhome into her owne house; but also would as often go to his, which wassome-what neere at hand, and abide with him there, the most part ofthe night season.while cheta thus continued on these amorous courses, it fortuned,that her slye suspitious husband, beganne to perceive, that thoughshee drunke very much with him, yea, untill he was quite spent andgone: yet she remained fresh and sober still, and therby imaginedstrange matters, that he being fast asleepe, his wife then tookeadvantage of his drowsinesse, and mightand so forth. beeing desirousto make experience of this his distrust, hee returned home at night(not having drunke any thing all the whole day) dissembling both byhis words and behaviour, as if he were notoriously drunke indeede.which his wife constantly beleeving, saide to her selfe: that heehad now more neede of sleepe, then drinke; getting him immediatelyinto his warme bed; and then going downe the staires againe, softlywent out of doores unto her friends house, as formerly she had used todo, and there shee remained untill midnight.
tofano perceiving that his wife came not to bed, and imagining tohave heard his doore both open and shut: arose out of his bed, andcalling his wife cheta divers times, without any answere returned: heewent downe the staires, and finding the doore but closed too, madeit fast and sure on the inside, and then got him up to the window,to watch the returning home of his wife, from whence shee came, andthen to make her conditions apparantly knowne. so long there hestayed, till at the last she returned indeede, and finding the dooreso surely shut, shee was exceeding sorrowful, essaying how she mightget it open by strength: which when tofano had long suffered her invaine to approove, thus hee spake to her. cheta, all thy labour ismeerely lost, because heere is no entrance allowed for thee; thereforereturn to the place from whence thou camest, that all thy friendsmay judge of thy behaviour, and know what a night-walker thou artbecome.
the woman hearing this unpleasing language, began to use allhumble entreaties, desiring him (for charities sake) to open the dooreand admit her entrance, because she had not bin in any such place,as his jelous suspition might suggest to him: but onely to visit aweak and sickly neighbour, the nights being long, she not (as yet)capeable of sleepe, nor willing to sit alone in the house. but all herperswasions served to no purpose, he was so setled in his owneopinion, that all the town should now see her nightly gading, whichbefore was not so much as suspected. cheta seeing, that faire meaneswould not prevalle, shee entred into roughe speeches andthreatnings, saying: if thou wilt not open the doore and let me comein, i will so shame thee, as never base man was. as how i pray thee?answered tofano, what canst thou do to me?
the woman, whom love had inspired with sprightly counsell,ingeniously enstructing her what to do in this distresse, stearnlythus replyed. before i will suffer any such shame as thou intendesttowards mee, i will drowne my selfe heere in this well before ourdoore, where being found dead, and thy villanous jealousie soapparantly knowne, beside thy more then beastly drunkennesse: allthe neighbours will constantly beleeve, that thou didst first strangleme in the house, and afterwardes threw me into this well. so eitherthou must flie upon the supposed offence, or lose all thy goodes bybanishment, or (which is much more fitting for thee) have thy headsmitten off, as a wilfull murtherer of thy wife; for all will judge itto be no otherwise. all which wordes, mooved not tofano a jot from hisobstinat determination: but he still persisting therin, thus shespake. i neither can nor will longer endure this base villanie ofthine: to the mercy of heaven i commit my soul, and stand there mywheele, a witnesse against so hard-hearted a murtherer.
no sooner had she thus spoke, but the night being so extreamly dark,as they could not discerne one another; cheta went to the well,where finding a verie great stone, which lay loose upon the brim ofthe well, even as if it had beene layde there on purpose, shee criedout aloud, saying. forgive me faire heavens, and so threw the stonedowne into the well. the night being very still and silent, the fal ofthe great stone made such a dreadfull noise in the well; that hehearing it at the windowe, thought verily she had drowned her selfeindeede. whereupon, running downe hastily, and taking a bucketfastened to a strong cord: he left the doore wide open, intendingspeedily to helpe her. but she standing close at the dooresentrance, before he could get to the wels side; she was within thehouse, softly made the doore fast on the inside, and then went up tothe window, where tofano before had stood talking to her.
while he was thus dragging with his bucket in the well, crying andcalling cheta, take hold good cheta, and save thy life: she stoodlaughing in the window, saying. water should bee put into winebefore a man drinkes it, and not when he hath drunke too much already.tofano hearing his wife thus to flout him out of his window, went backto the doore, and finding it made fast against him: he willed hir togrant him entrance. but she, forgetting all gentle language, whichformerly she had used to him: in meere mockery and derision (yetintermixed with some sighes and teares, which women are saide tohave at command) out aloud (because the neighbours should heare her)thus she replyed.
beastly drunken knave as thou art, this night thou shalt not comewithin these doores, i am no longer able to endure thy base behaviour,it is more then high time, that thy course of life should beepubliquely known, and at what drunken houres thou returnest home tothy house. tofano, being a man of very impatient nature, was as bitterunto her in words on the other which the neighbours about them (bothmen and women) hearing; looked forth of their windowes, and demaundinga reason for this their disquietnesse, cheta (seeming as if shewept) sayde.
alas my good neighbours, you see at what unfitting houres, thisbad man comes home to his house, after hee hath lyen in a taverneall day drunke, sleeping and snorting like a swine. you are myhonest witnesses, how long i have suffered this beastlinesse in him,yet neyther your good counsell, nor my too often lovingadrionitions, can worke that good which wee have expected.wherefore, to try if shame can procure any amendment, i have shuthim out of doores, until his drunken fit be over-past, and so he shallstand to coole his feet.
tofano (but in very uncivill maner) told her being abroad thatnight, and how she had used him: but the neighbours seeing her to bewithin the house, and beleeving her, rather then him, in regard of histoo well knowne ill qualities; very sharpely reproved him, gave himgrosse speeches, pittying that any honest woman should be socontinually abused. now my good neighbours (quoth she) you see whatmanner of man he is. what would you thinke of me, if i should walk thestreets thus in the night time, or be so late out of mine ownehouse, as this dayly drunkard is? i was affraid least you would havegiven credit to his dissembling speeches, when he told you, that i wasat the welles side, and threw something into the well: but that i knowyour better opinion of me, and how sildome i am to be seene out ofdoores, although he would induce your sharper judgement of me, and laythat shame upon me, wherein he hath sinned himselfe.
the neighbours, both men and women, were all very severelyincensed against tofano, condemning him for his great fault that nightcommitted, and avouching his wife to be vertuous and honest. withina little while, the noise passing from neighbour to neighbour, atthe length it came to the eares of her kindred, who forthwith resortedthither, and hearing how sharpely the neighbours reprehended tofano:they tooke him, soundly bastanadoed him, and hardly left any bone ofhim unbruised. afterward, they went into the house, tooke all suchthings thence as belonged to hir, taking hir also with them to theirdwelling, and threatning tofano with further infliction of punishment,both for his drunkennesse, and causlesse jealousie.
tofano perceyving how curstly they had handled him, and what crookedmeanes might further be used against him, in regard her kindred andfriends were very mightie: thought it much better, patiently to sufferthe wrong alreadie done him, then by obstinate contending to proceedfurther, and fare worse. he became a suter to her kindred, that almight be forgotten and forgiven, in recompence whereof; he would notonely refraine from drunkennesse, but also, never more be jelous ofhis wife. this being faithfully promised, and cheta reconciled toher husband, all strife was ended, she enjoyed her friends favour,as occasion served, but yet with such discretion, as it was not noted.thus the coxcombe foole, was faine to purchase his peace, after anotorious wrong sustained, and further injuries to bee offered.
the seventh day, the fift novell
in just scorne and mockery of such jealous husbands, that will be
so idle headed upon no occasion. yet when they have good reason
for it, do least of all suspect any such injury
a jealous man, clouded with the habite of a priest, became theconfessour to his owne wife; who made him beleeve, that she wasdeepely in love with a priest, which came every night, and lay withher. by meanes of which confession, while her jealous husbandwatched the doore of his house; to surprize the priest when he came:she that never meant to do amisse, had the company of a secret friend,who came over the toppe of the house to visite her, while herfoolish husband kept the doore.
madam lauretta having ended her novell, and every one commendedthe woman, for fitting tofano in his kinde; and, as his jealousieand drunkennesse justly deserved: the king (to prevent all losse oftime) turned to madame fiammetta, commaunding her to follow next:whereuppon, very graciously, shee beganne in this manner.
noble ladies, the precedent novell delivered by madame lauretta,maketh me willing to speake of another jealous man; as being halfeperswaded, that whatsoever is done to them by their wives, andespecially upon no occasion given, they doe no more then wellbecommeth them. and if those grave heads, which were the firstinstituters of lawes, had diligently observed all things; i am ofthe minde, that they would have ordained no other penalty for women,then they appointed against such, as (in their owne defence) do offendany other. for jealous husbands, are meere insidiators of theirwives lives, and most diligent pursuers of their deaths, being locktup in their houses all the weeke long, imployed in nothing butdomesticke drudging affayres: which makes them desirous of highfestivall dayes, to receive some litle comfort abroad, by an honestrecreation or pastime, as husbandmen in the fields, artizans in ourcitie, or governours in our judiciall courtes; yea, or as our lordhimselfe, who rested the seaventh day from all his travailes. inlike manner, it is so willed and ordained by the lawes, as well divineas humane, which have regard to the glory of god, and for the commongood of every one; making distinction betweene those dayes appointedfor labour, and the other determined for rest. whereto jealous persons(in no case) will give consent, but all those dayes (which for otherwomen are pleasing and delightfull) unto such, over whom they command,are most irksome, sadde and sorrowful, because then they are lockt up,and very strictly restrained. and if question wer urged, how many goodwomen do live and consume away in this torturing het of affliction:i can make no other answere, but such as feele it, are best able todiscover it. wherefore to conclude the proheme to my presentpurpose, let none be over rash in condemning women: for what they doto their husbands, being jealous without occasion; but rathercommend their wit and providence.
somtime (faire ladies) there lived in arimino, a merchant, very richin wealth and worldly possessions, who having a beautifull gentlewomanto his wife, he became extreamly jelous of her. and he had no otherreason for this foolish conceit; but, like as he loved hir dearly, andfound her to be very absolutely faire: even so he imagined, thatalthogh she devised by her best meanes to give him content; yet otherswould grow enamored of her, because she appeared so amiable to al.in which respect, time might tutor her to affect some other besidehimselfe: the onely common argument of every bad minded man, beingweake and shallow in his owne understanding. this jelous humorincreasing in him more and more, he kept her in such narrow restraint:that many persons condemned to death, have enoyed larger libertie intheir imprisonment. for, she might not bee present at feasts,weddings, nor goe to church, or so much as to be seen at her doore:nay, she durst not stand in her window, nor looke out of her house,for any occasion whatsoever. by means whereof, life seemed mosttedious and offensive to her, and she supported it the moreimpatiently, because shee knew her selfe not any way faulty.
seeing her husband still persist in this shamefull course towardsher; she studied, how she might best comfort her selfe in thisdesolate case: by devising some one meane or other (if any at all wereto bee founde) wherby he might be requited in his kind, and wearthat badge of shame whereof he was now but onely affraid. andbecause she could not gain so small a permission, as to be seene atany window, where (happily) she might have observed some one passingby in the street, discerning a litle parcell of her love: sheremembred at length, that, in the next house to her husbands (theyboth joyning close together) there dwelt a comely yong propergentleman, whose perfections carried correspondencie with her desires.she also considered with her selfe, that if there were any partitionwall; such a chinke or cranny might easily be made therein, by which(at one time or other) she should gaine a sight of the younggentleman, and finde an houre so fitting, as to conferre with him, andbestow her lovely favour on him, if he pleased to accept it. ifsuccesse (in this case) proved answerable to her hope, then thus sheresolved to outrun the rest of her wearisome dayes, except the frensieof jealousie did finish her husbands loathed life before.
walking from one roome to another, thorough every part of the house;and no wall escaping without diligent surveying; on a day, when herhusband was absent from home, she espyed in a corner very secret, anindifferent cleft in the wall; which though it yeelded no full view onthe other side, yet she plainly perceived it to be an handsomechamber, and grew more then halfe perswaded, that either it might bethe chamber of philippo (for so was the neighbouring yong gentlemannamed) or else a passage guiding thereto. a chambermaid of hers, whocompassioned her case very much; made such observance, by hermistresses direction, that she found it to be philippoes bedchamber, and where alwayes he used to lodge alone. by often visitingthis rift or chinke in the wall, especially when the gentleman wasthere; and by throwing in little stones, flowers, and such likethings, which fell still in his way as he walked: so farre sheprevailed, that he stepping to the chinke, to know from whence theycame; shee called softly to him, who knowing her voyce, there they hadsuch private conference together, as was not any way displeasing toeither. so that the chinke being made a little larger; yet so, as itcould not be easily discerned: their mouthes might meete with kissestogether, and their hands folded each in other; but nothing else to beperformed, for continuall feare of her jelous husband.
now the feast of christmasse drawing neere, the gentlewoman saidto her husband; that, if it stood with his liking: she would do suchduty as fitted with so solemne a time, by going earely in a morningunto church, there to be confessed, and receive her saviour, asother christians did. how now? replied the jealous asse, what sinneshave you committed, that should neede confession? how husband? quothshe, what do you thinke me to be a saint? who knoweth not, i pray you,that i am as subject to sinne, as any other woman living in the world?but my sins are not to be revealed to you, because you are nopriest. these words enflamed his jealousie more violently then before,and needes must he know what sinnes she had committed, and havingresolved what to do in this case, made her answer: that hee wascontented with her motion, alwaies provided, that she went to no otherchurch, then unto their owne chappel, betimes in a morning; andtheir own chaplaine to confesse her, or some other priest by himappointed, but not any other: and then she to returne home presentlyagaine. she being a woman of acute apprehension, presently collectedhis whole intention: but seeming to take no knowledge thereof,replyed, that she would not swerve from his direction.
when the appointed day was come, she arose very earely, and beingprepared answerable to her owne liking, to the chappell shee went asher husband had appointed, where her jealous husband (being muchearlier risen then she) attended for her comming: having so ordred thematter with his chaplaine, that he was cloathed in his cowle, with alarge hood hanging over his eyes, that she should not know him, and sohe went and sate downe in the confessors place. shee being entred intothe chappell, and calling for the priest to heare her confession, hemade her answer: that he could not intend it, but would bring her toanother holy brother, who was at better leysure then hee. so to herhusband he brought her, that seemed (in all respects) like theconfessor himselfe: save onely his hood was not so closely veyled, butshee knew his beard, and said to her selfe. what a mad world is thiswhen jealousie can metamorphose an ordinary man into a priest? but,let me alone with him, i meane to fit him with that which he lookesfor.
so, appearing to have no knowledge at all of him, downe she fellat his feete, and he had conveyed a few cherry stones into hismouth, to trouble his speech from her knowledge; for, in all thingsels, he thoght himselfe to be sufficiently fitted for her. in thecourse of her confession, she declared, that she was married to a mostwicked jealous husband, and with whom she lead a very hatefull life.neverthelesse (quoth she) i am indifferently even with him, for i ambeloved of an holie fryar, that every night commeth and lyeth with me.when the jealous husband heard this, it stabbed him like a dagger tothe heart, and, but for his greedy covetous desire to know more; hewould faine have broke off confession, and got him gone. but,perceiving that it was his wisest course, he questioned further withhis wife, saying: why good woman, doth not your husband lodge withyou? yes sir, quoth she. how is it possible then (replyed the husband)that the friar can lodge there with you too?
she, dissembling a farre fetcht sigh, thus answered. reverend sir, iknow not what skilfull art the fryar useth, but this i am sure,every doore in our house will flye open to him, so soone as he dothbut touch it. moreover, he told me, that when he commeth unto mychamber doore, he speaketh certaine words to himselfe, whichimmediately casteth my husband into a dead sleepe, and,understanding him to bee thus sleepily entranced: he openeth thedoore, entreth in, lieth downe by me, and this every night hefaileth not to do. the jealous coxcomb angerly scratching his head,and wishing his wife halfe hangd, said: mistresse, this is verybadly done, for you should keepe your selfe from all men, but yourhusband onely. that shall i never doe, answered shee, because (indeed)i love him dearely. why then (quoth our supposed confessor) i cannotgive you any absolution. i am the more sory sir, said she, i camenot hither to tell you any leasings, for if i could, yet i wouldnot, because it is not good to fable with such saint-like men as youare. you do therein (quoth hee) the better, and surely i am verysory for you, because in this dangerous condition, it will bee theutter losse of your soule: neverthelesse, both for your husbandssake and your owne, i will take some paines, and use such especiallprayers in your name, which may (perchance) greatly avayle you. andi purpose now and then, to send you a novice or young clearke of mine,whom you may safely acquaint with your minde, and signifie to me, byhim, whether they have done you good, or no: and if they provehelpefull, then will we further proceed therein. alas sir, said she,never trouble your selfe, in sending any body to our house; because,if my husband should know it, he is so extreamly jealous, as all theworld cannot otherwise perswade him, but that he commeth thither forno honest intent, and so i shall live worse then now i do. fear notthat, good woman, quoth he, but beleeve it certainly, that i will havesuch a care in this case, as your husband shall never speake thereofto you. if you can doe so sir, sayde she, proceed i pray you, and i amwell contented.
confession being thus ended, and she receiving such pennance ashee appointed, she arose on her feete, and went to heare masse;while our jealous woodcocke (testily puffing and blowing) put offhis religious habite, returning home presently to his house, beatinghis braines al the way as he went, what meanes he might best devise,for the taking of his wife and the friar together, whereby to havethem both severely punished. his wife being come home from thechappell, discerned by her husbands lookes, that he was like tokeepe but a sory christmasse: yet he used his utmost industry, toconceale what he had done, and which she knew as well as himself.and he having fully resolved, to watch his own street doore the nextnight ensuing in person, in expectation of the friars comming, saideto his wife. i have occasion both to suppe and lodge out of my housethis night, wherefore see you the streete doore to be surely made faston the inside, and the doore at the middest of the staires, as alsoyour own chamber doore, and then (in gods name) get you to bed.whereto she answered, that all should be done as hee had appointed.
afterward, when she saw convenient time, she went to the chink inthe wall, and making such a signe as shee was woont to doe:phillippo came thither, to whom she declared all her morningsaffayres, and what directions her husband had given her. furthermoreshe saide, certaine i am, that he will not depart from the house,but sit and watch the doore without, to take one that comes not heere.if therefore, you can climbe over the house top, and get in at ourgutter window, you and i may conferre more familiarly together. theyoung gentleman being no dullard, had his lesson quickly taught him;and when night was come, geloso (for so must wee tearme thecocke-braind husband) armes himselfe at all points, with a browne billin his hand, and so he sits to watch his owne doore. his wife had madefast all the doores, especially that on the midst of the stayres,because he should not (by any means) come to her chamber; and so, whenthe houre served, the gentleman adventured over the house top, foundthe gutter window, and the way conducting him to her chamber, wherei leave them to their further amorous conference.
geloso, more than halfe mad with anger, first, because hee hadlost his supper: next, having sitten almost all the night (which wasextreamely cold and windle) his armor much mollesting him, and yethe could see no friar come: when day drew neere, and hee ashamed towatch there any longer; conveighed himselfe to some more convenientplace, where putting off his armes, and seeming to come from the placeof his lodging; about the ninth houre, he found his doore open, entredin, and went up the stayres, going to dinner with his wife. within awhile after, according as geloso had ordred the businesse, a youthcame thither, seeming to be the novice sent from the confessor, and hebeing admitted to speake with her, demanded, whether shee weretroubled or mollested that night passed, as formerly she had bin,and whether the partie came or no? the woman, who knew well enough themessenger (notwithstanding all his formall disguise) made answer: thatthe party expected, came not: but if hee had come, it was to nopurpose; because her minde was now otherwise altred, albeit shechanged not a jote from her amorous conclusion.
what should i now further say unto you? geloso continued his watchmany nights afterward, as hoping to surprize the friar at hisentrance, and his wife kept still her contented quarter, accordingas opportunitie served. in the conclusion, geloso beeing no longerable to endire his bootlesse watching, nor some (more then ordinary)pleasing countenance in his wife: one day demaunded of her (with avery stearne and frowning brow) what secret sinnes shee had revealedto the ghostly father, upon the day of her shrift? the womanreplyed, that she would not tell him, neyther was it a matterreasonable, or lawfull for her to doe. wicked woman, answeredgeloso: i knowe them all well enough, even in despight of thee, andevery word that thou spakest unto him. but huswife, now i must furtherknow, what the fryar is, with whom you are so farre in love, and (bymeanes of his enchantments) lyeth with you every night; tell me whatand who he is, or else i meane to cut your throate.
the woman immediately made answer, it was not true, that she wasin love with any fryar. how? quoth geloso, didst not thou confesseso much to the ghostly father, the other day when thou wast at shrift?no sir, sayde she, but if i did, i am sure he would not disclose it toyou, except hee suffered you to bee there present, which is an articlebeyonde his dutie. but if it were so, then i confesse freely, that idid say so unto him. make an end then quickely wife (quoth geloso) andtell mee who the friar is. the woman fell into a hearty laughter,saying. it liketh me singularly well, when a wise man will sufferhimselfe to be ledde by a simple woman, even as a sheepe is to theslaughter, and by the hornes. if once thou wast wise, that wisedomebecame utterly lost, when thou felst into that divellish frensie ofjealousie, without knowing anie reason for it: for, by thisbeastlike and no manly humor, thou hast eclipsed no meane part of myglory, and womanly reputation.
doest thou imagine husband, that if i were so blinded in the eyes ofmy head, as thou art in them which should informe thine understanding;i could have found out the priest, that would needs bee myconfessor? i knew thee husband to be the man, and therefore i preparedmy wit accordingly, to fit thee with the foolish imagination whichthou soughtest for, and (indeed) gave it thee. for, if thou hadstbeene wise, as thou makest the world to beleeve by outwardapparance, thou wouldest never have expressed such a basenesse ofminde, to borrow the coulour of a sanctified cloake, thereby toundermine the secrets of thine honest meaning wife. wherefore, tofeede thee in thy fond suspition, i was the more free in myconfession, and tolde thee truely, with whom, and how heinously ihad transgressed. did i not tell thee, that i loved a fryar? and artnot thou he whom love, being a fryar, and my ghostly father, though(to thine owne shame) thou madst thy selfe so? i said moreover, thatthere is not any doore in our house, that can keepe it selfe shutagainst him, but (when he pleaseth) he comes and lies with me. nowtell me husband, what doore in our house hath (at any time) bin shutagainst thee, but they are freely thine owne, and grant thee entrance?thou art the same friar that confest me, and lieth every night withme, and so often as thou sentst thy yong novice or clearke to me, asoften did i truly returne thee word, when the same fryar lay withme. but (by jealousie) thou hast so lost thine understanding, thatthou wilt hardly beleeve all this.
alas good man, like an armed watchman, thou satst at thine ownedoore all a cold winters night, perswading mee (poorelly credulouswoman) that, upon urgent occasions, thou must needs suppe and lodgefrom home. remember thy selfe therefore better heereafter, become atrue understanding man, as thou shouldst bee, and make not thy selfe amocking stocke to them, who knoweth thy jealous qualities, as wellas i do, and be not so watchfull over me, as thou art. for i sweare bymy true honesty, that if i were but as willing, as thou artsuspitious: i could deceive thee, if thou hadst an hundred eyes, asnature affords thee but two, and have my pleasures freely, yet thou benot a jot the wiser, or my credit any way impaired.
our wonderfull wise geloso, who (very advisedly) considred that hehad wholly heard his wives secret confession, and dreamed now on noother doubt beside, but (perceiving by her speeches) how hee wasbecome a scorne to al men: without returning other answer, confirmedhis wife to be both wise and honest, and now when he hadde justoccasion to be jealous indeede, hee utterly forsware it, and countedthem all coxcombes that would be so misguided. wherefore, she havingthus wisely wonne the way to her owne desires, and he reduced into amore humane temper: i hope there was no more neede, of clambringover houses in the night time like cats, nor walking in at gutterwindowes; but all abuses were honestly reformed.
the seventh day, the sixth novell
wherein is manifestly discerned, that if love be driven to a narrow
straite in any of his attempts; yet hee can
accomplish his purpose by some other supply
madame isabella, delighting in the company of her affected friend,named lionello, and she being likewise beloved by signiorlambertuccio: at the same time as shee had entertained lionello,shee was also visited by lambertuccio. her husband returning home inthe very instant; shee caused lambertuccio to run forth with adrawne sword in his hand, and (by that meanes) made an excusesufficient for lionello to her husband.
wondrously pleasing to all the company, was the reported novell ofmadame fiammetta, every one applauding the womans wisedome, and thatshe had done no more, then as the jealous foole her husband justlydeserved. but shee having ended, the king gave order unto madamepampinea, that now it was her turne to speake, whereupon, thus shebegan. there are no meane store of people who say (though very falseand foolishly,) that love maketh many to be out of their wits, andthat such as fall in love, do utterly loose their understanding. tomee this appeareth a very ydle opinion, as already hath beene approvedby the related discourses, and shall also bee made manifest by anotherof mine owne.
in our city of florence, famous for some good, though as many badqualities, there dwelt (not long since) a gentlewoman, endued withchoice beauty and admirable perfections, being wife to signiorbeltramo, a very valiant knight, and a man of great possessions. asoftentimes it commeth to passe, that a man cannot alwayes feede on onekind of bread, but his appetite will be longing after change: so faredit with this lady, named isabella, she being not satisfied with thedelights of her husband; grew enamoured of a young gentleman, calledlionello, compleate of person and commendable qualities, albeit not ofthe fairest fortunes, yet his affection every way sutable to hers. andfull well you know (faire ladies) that where the mindes irreciprocallyaccorded, no dilligence wanteth for the desires execution: so thisamorous couple, made many solemne protestations, untill they shouldbee friended by opportunity.
it fortuned in the time of their hopefull expectation a knight,named signior lambertuccio, fell likewise in love with isabella: butbecause he was somewhat unsightly of person, and utterly unpleasing inthe eye, she grew regardlesse of his frequent solicitings, and wouldnot accept either tokens, or letters. which when hee saw, (beingvery rich and of great power) hee sought to compasse his intent by acontrary course, threatning her with scandall and disgrace to herreputation, and with his associates to bandie against her bestfriends. she knowing what manner of man he was, and how able toabuse any with infamous imputations, wisely returned him hopefullpromises, though never meaning to performe any, but onely(lady-like) to flatter and foole him therewith.
some few miles distant from florence, beltramo had a castle ofpleasure, and there his lady isabella used to live all summer, asall other doe the like, being so possessed. on a day, beltramo beingridden from home, and she having sent for lionello, to take theadvantage of her husbands absence; accordingly he went, not doubtingbut to winne what he had long expected. signior lambertuccio on theother side, meeting beltramo riding from his castle, and isabellanow fit to enjoy his company: gallops thither with all possiblespeede, because hee would bee no longer delayed. scarcely was lionelloentred the castle, and receiving directions by the waiting woman, toher ladies chamber: but lambertuccio gallopped in at the gate, whichthe woman perceiving, ranne presently and acquainted her lady with thecomming of lambertuccio.
now was shee the onely sorrowfull woman of the world; for nothingwas now to bee feared, but stormes and tempests, because lambertuccio,spake no other then lightning and thunder, and lionello, (being nolesse affraide then shee) by her perswasion crept behind the bed,where he hid himselfe very contentedly. by this time lambertucciowas dismounted from his courser, which he fastened (by the bridle)to a ring in the wall, and then the waiting woman came to him, toguide him to her lady and mistresse: who stood ready at the staireshead, graced him with a very acceptable welcome, yet marvelling muchat his so sodaine comming. lady (quoth he) i met your husband upon theway, which granting mine accesse to see you; i come to claime yourlong delayed promise, the time being now so favourable for it.
before he had uttered halfe these words, beltramo, having forgotan especiall evidence in his study, which was the onely occasion ofhis journey, came gallopping backe againe into the castell court,and seeing such a goodly gelding stand fastened there, could notredily imagine who was the owner thereof. the waiting woman, uponthe sight of her masters entring into the court, came to her lady,saying: my master beltramo is returned back?, newly alighted, and(questionlesse) comming up the staires. now was our lady isabella, tentimes worse affrighted then before, (having two severall amouroussuters in her house, both hoping, neither speeding, yet her creditelying at the stake for either) by this unexpected returne of herhusband. moreover, there was no possible meanes, for the concealing ofsignior lambertuccio, because his gelding stood in the open court, andtherefore made a shrewde presumption against her, upon the leastdoubtfull question urged.
neverthelesse, as womens wits are alwayes best upon suddenconstraints, looking forth of her window, and espying her husbandpreparing to come up: she threw her selfe on her day couch, speakingthus (earnestly) to lambertuccio. sir, if ever you loved mee, andwould have me faithfully to beleeve it, by the instant safety bothof your owne honour, and my life, doe but as i advise you. forthdraw your sword, and, with a stearne countenance, threatning death anddestruction: run downe the staires, and when you are beneath, say. isweare by my best fortunes, although i misse of thee now heere, yeti will be sure to finde thee some where else. and if my husbandoffer to stay you, or moove any question to you: make no otheranswere, but what you formerly spake in fury. beside, so soone asyou are mounted on horsebacke, have no further conference with him,upon any occasion whatsoever; to prevent all suspition in him, ofour future intendments.
lambertuccio sware many terrible oathes, to observe her directionsin every part, and having drawne forth his sword, grasping it naked inhis hand, and setting worse lookes on the businesse, then evernature gave him, because he had spent so much labour in vaine; hefailed not in a jot of the ladies injunction. beltramo havingcommanded his horse to safe custody, and meeting lambertucciodiscending downe the staires, so armed, swearing, and mostextreamely storming, wondring extraordinarily at his threatning words,made offer to imbrace him., and understand the reason of hisdistemper. lambertuccio repulsing him rudely, and setting foote in thestirrup, mounted on his gelding, and spake nothing else but this. isweare by the fairest of all my fortunes, although i misse of theeheere: yet i will be sure to find thee some where else, and so hegallopped mainely away.
when beltramo was come up into his wives chamber, hee found her castdowne upon her couch, weeping, full of feare, and greatlydiscomforted; wherefore he said unto her, what is hee that signiorlambertuccio is so extreamely offended withall, and threatneth in suchimplacable manner? the lady arising from her couch, and going neere tothe bed, because lionello might the better heare her; returned herhusband this answere. husband (quoth she) never was i so dreadfullyaffrighted till now; for, a young gentleman, of whence, or what he is,i know not, came running into our castle for rescue, being pursuedby signior lambertuccio, a weapon ready drawne in his hand.ascending up our stayres, by what fortune, i know not, he found mychamber doore standing open, finding me also working on my sampler,and in wonderfull feare and trembling.
good madame (quoth hee) for gods sake helpe to save my life, or elsei shall be slaine heere in your chamber. hearing his pittious cry, andcompassionating his desperate case; i arose from my worke, and in mydemaunding of whence, and what he was, that durst presume so boldlyinto my bed-chamber: presently came up signior lambertuccio also, inthe same uncivill sorte, as before i tolde you, swaggering andswearing; where is this traiterous villaine? heereupon, i stept(somewhat stoutly) to my chamber doore, and as hee offered to enter,with a womans courage i resisted him, which made him so much enragedagainst mee, that when hee saw mee to debarre his entrance; after manyterrible and vile oathes and vowes, hee ranne downe the stayresagaine, in such like manner as you chaunced to meete him.
now trust mee deare wife (said beltramo) you behaved your selfe verywell and worthily: for, it would have beene a most notoriousscandall to us, if a man should bee slaine in your bed-chamber: andsignior lambertuccio carryed himselfe most dishonestly, to pursueany man so outragiously, having taken my castle as his sanctuary.but alas wife, what is become of the poore affrighted gentleman?introth sir (quoth she) i know not, but (somewhere or other)heereabout hee is hidden. where art you honest friend" said plainemeaning beltramo; come forth and feare not, for thine enemy is gone.
lionello, who had heard all the forepassed discourse, which shee haddelivered to her husband beltramo, came creeping forth amazedly (asone now very fearefully affrighted indeede) from under the furtherside of the bedde, and beltramo saide to him, what a quarrell wasthis, between thee and furious lambertuccio? not any at all sir,replyed lionello, to my knowledge, which verily perswadeth me; thateither he is not well in his wits, or else he mistaketh me for someother; because, so soone as he saw me on the way, somewhat neere tothis your castle, he drew forth hi sword, and swearing an horribleoath, said. traitor thou art a dead man. upon these rough words, istayed not to question the occasion of mine offending him: but fiedfrom him so fast as possibly i could; but confesse my selfe(indeede) over-bold, by presuming into your ladies bed chamber,which yet (equalled with her mercie) hath bin the onely meanes at thistime, of saving my life she hath done like a good lady, answeredbeltramo, and i do verie much commend her for it. but, recollect thydismayed spirits together, for i will see thee safely securedlience, afterward, looke to thy selfe so well as thou canst. dinnerbeing immediately made ready, and they having merrily feastedtogether: he bestowed a good gelding on lionello, and rode alongwith him to florence, where he left him quietly in his owne lodging.the selfe-same evening (according as isabella had given enstruction)lionello conferred with lambertuccio: and such an agreement passedbetweene them, that though some rough speeches were noised abroad,to set the better colour on the businesse; yet al matters were socleanly carried, that beltramo never knew this queint deceitfullpolicy of his wife.
the seventh day, the seventh novell
whereby is declared, that such as keepe many honest seeming
servants, may sometime finde a knave among them, and one
that proves to be oversawcy with his master
losovico discovered to his mistresse madame beatrix, how amorouslyhe was affected to her. she cunningly sent egano her husband intohis garden, in all respects disguised like her selfe, while (friendly)lodovico conferred with her in the meane while. afterward, lodovicopretending a lascivious allurement of his mistresse, thereby towrong his honest master, insted of her, beateth egano soundly in thegarden.
this so sodaine dexterity of wit in isabella, related in veriemodest manner by madame pampinea, was not onely admired by all thecompany; but likewise passed with as generall approbation. but yetmadam philomena (whom the king had commanded next to succeede)peremptorily sayde. worthy ladies, if i am not deceived; i intend totell you another tale presently; as much to be commended as the last.
you are to understand then, that it is no long while since, whenthere dwelt in paris a florentine gentleman, who falling into decay ofhis estate, by over-bountifull expences; undertooke the degree of amerchant, and thrived so well by his trading, that he grew to greatwealth, having one onely sonne by his wife, named lodovico. thissonne, partaking somewhat in his fathers former height of minde, andno way inclineable to deale in merchandize, had no meaning to be ashopman, and therefore accompanied the gentlemen of france, insundry services for the king; among whom, by his singular goodcarriage and qualites, he happened to be not meanly esteemed. whilethus he continued in the court, it chanced, that certaine knights,returning from jerusalem, having there visited the holy sepulcher, andcomming into company where lodovico was: much familiar discoursepassed amongst them, concerning the faire women of france, england,and other parts of the world where they had bin, and what delicatebeauties they had seene.
one in the company constantly avouched, that of all the women bythem so generally observed, there was not any comparable to the wifeof egano de galluzzi, dwelling in bologna, and her name madam beatrix,reputed to be the onely faire woman of the world. many of the restmaintained as much, having bin at bologna, and likewise seene her.lodovico hearing the woman to be so highly commended, and never (asyet) feeling any thought of amorous inclination; became sodainelytoucht with an earnest desire of seeing her, and his minde couldentertaine no other matter, but onely of travailing thither to seeher, yea, and to continue there, if occasion so served. the reason forhis journey urged to his father, was to visit jerusalem, and theholy sepulcher, which with much difficulty, at length he obtainedhis leave.
being on his journey towards bologna, by the name of anichino, andnot of lodovico, and being there arrived; upon the day following,and having understood the place of her abiding: it was his good happe,to see the lady at her window; she appearing in his eye farre morefaire, then all reports had made her to be. heereupon, his affectionbecame so enflamed to her, as he vowed, never to depart frombologna, untill he had obtained her love. and devising by whatmeanes he might effect his hopes, he grew perswaded (setting all otherattempts aside) that if he could be entertained into her husbandsservice, and undergo some businesse in the house, time might tutor himto obtaine his desire. having given his attendants sufficientallowance, to spare his company, and take no knowledge of him, sellinghis horses also, and other notices which might discover him: he grewinto acquaintance with the hoste of the house where he lay,revealing an earnest desire in himselfe, to serve som lord or worthygentleman, if any were willing to give him entertainment.
now beleeve me sir (answered the hoste) you seeme worthy to have agood service indeede, and i know a noble gentleman of this cittie, whois named egano: he will (without all question) accept your offer,for hee keepeth many men of verie good deserving, and you shall havemy furtherance therein so much as may be. as he promised, so heperformed, and taking anichino with him unto egano: so farre heprevailed by his friendly protestations, and good opinion of the younggentleman; that anichino was (without more ado) accepted in eganoesservice, then which, nothing could be more pleasing to him. now had hethe benefit of dayly beholding his hearts mistresse, and so acceptableproved his service to egano, that he grew very farre in love with him:not undertaking any affayres whatsoever, without the advice anddirection of anichino, so that he reposed his most especiall trustin him, as a man altogether governed by him.
it fortuned upon a day, that egano being ridden to flye his hawke atthe river, and anichino remaining behinde at home, madame beatrix, who(as yet) had taken no notice of anichinoes love to her (albeit herselfe, observing his faire carriage and commendable qualities, washighly pleased to have so seeming a servant) called him to play at thechesse with her: and anichino, coveting nothing more then to contenther, carried himselfe so dexteriously in the game, that he permittedhir still to win, which was no little joy to her. when all thegentlewomen, and other friends there present, as spectators tobehold their play, had taken their farewell, and were departed,leaving them all alone, yet gaming still: anichino breathing forthan intire sigh, madame beatrix looking merrily on him, said. tell meanichino, art not thou angrie, to see me win? it should appeare soby that solemne sigh. no truly madame, answered anichino, a matterof farre greater moment, then losse of infinite games at the chesse,was the occasion why i sighed. i pray thee (replyed the lady) by thelove thou bearest me, as being my servant (if any love at all remainin thee towards me) give me a reason for that harty sigh.
when he heard himselfe so severely conjured, by the love he bareto her, and loved none else in the world beside: he gave a farremore hart-sicke sigh, then before. then his lady and mistresseentreated him seriously, to let her know the cause of those twodeepe sighes: whereto anichino thus replyed. madam, if i should tellyou, i stand greatly in feare of offending you: and when i have toldyou, i doubt your discovery thereof to some other. beleeve me anichino(quoth she) therein thou neither canst, or shalt offend me.moreover, assure thy selfe, that i will never disclose it to anyother, except i may do it with thy consent. madame (saide hee)seeing you have protested such a solemne promise to mee, i willreveale no meane secret unto you.
so, with teares standing in his eyes, he told her what he was; wherehe heard the first report of her singular perfections, and instantlybecam enamored of her, as the maine motive of his entring into herservice. then, most humbly he entreated her, that if it might agreewith her good liking, she would be pleased to commisserate his case,and grace him with her private favours. or, if shee might not be somercifull to him; that yet she would vouchsafe, to let him live in thelowly condition as he did, and thinke it a thankefull duty in him,onely to love her. o singular sweetnesse, naturally living in fairefeminine blood! how justly art thou worthy of praise in the likeoccasions? thou couldst never be wonne by sighes and teares; buthearty imprecations have alwayes prevailed with thee, making theeapt and easie to amorous desires. if i had praises answerable to thygreat and glorious deservings, my voice should never faint, nor my penwaxe weary, in the due and obsequious performance of them.
madam beatrix, well observing anichino when he spake, and givingcredit to his so solemne protestations; they were so powerfull inprevailing with her, that her senses (in the same manner) wereenchanted; and sighes flew as violently from her, as before he hadvented them: which stormy tempest being a little over-blowne, thus shespake. anichino, my hearts deere affected friend, live in hope, fori tell thee truly, never could gifts, promises, nor any courtings usedto me by lords, knights, gentlemen, or other (although i have binsolicited by many) winne the lest grace or favour at my hand, no,nor move me to any affection. but thou, in a minute of time(compared with their long and tedious suing) hast expressed such asoveraigne potency in thy sweet words, that thou hast made me morethine, then mine owne: and beleeve it unfeinedly, i hold thee to beworthy of my love. wherefore, with this kisse i freely give it thee,and make thee a further promise, that before this night shall be fullypast, thou shalt in better manner perceive it. adventure into mychamber about the houre of midnight, i will leave the doore open: thouknowest on which side of the bed i use to rest, come thither and fearenot: if i sleep, the least gentle touch of thy hand will wake me,and then thou shalt see how much i love thee. so, with a kinde kisseor two, the bargaine was concluded, she licensing his departure forthat rime, and he staying in hope of his hearts happinesse, till when,he thought every houre a yeare.
in the meane while; egano returned home from hawking, and so sooneas he had supt (being very weary) he went to bed, and his ladielikewise with him, leaving her chamber doore open, according as shehad promised. at the houre appointed, anichino came, finding the doorebut easily put too, which (being entred) softly he closed againe, inthe same manner as he found it. going to the beds side where thelady lay, and gently touching her brest with his hand, he found her tobe awake, and perceiving he was come according unto promise, sheecaught his hand fast with hers, and held him very strongly. then,turning (as she could) towards egano, she made such meanes, as heeawaked, whereupon she spake unto him as followeth.
sir, yesternight i would have had a fewe speeches with you: but,in regard of your wearinesse and early going to bed, i could nothave any opportunity. now, this time and place being mostconvenient, i desire to bee resolved by you: among all the menretained into your service; which of them do you thinke to be thebest, most loyall, and worthiest to enjoy your love? egano answeredthus: wife, why should you move such a question to me? do not youknow, that i never had any servant heeretofore, or ever shall haveheereafter, in whom i reposed the like trust as i have done, and do inanichino? but to what end is this motion of yours? i will tell you sir(quoth she) and then be judge your self, whether i have reason to movethis question, or no. mine opinion every way equalled yours,concerning anichino, and that he was more just and faithfull to you,then any could be amongest all the rest: but husband, like as wherethe water runneth stillest, the foord is deepest, even so, hissmooth lookes have beguiled both you and me. for, no longer agoe, thenthis verie day, no sooner were you ridden foorth on hauking, but he(belike purposely) tarrying at home, watching such a leysure as bestfitted his intent: was not ashamed to solicite mee, both to abuse yourbed, and mine owne spotlesse honor.
moreover, he prosecuted his impious purpose with such alluringperswasions: that being a weake woman, and not willing to endureover many amorous proofes (onely to acquaint you with his mostsawcie immodestie, and to revenge your selfe uppon him as best youmay; your selfe beeing best able to pronounce him guiltie) i madehim promise, to meete him in our garden, presently aftermidde-night, and to finde mee sitting under the pine-tree; nevermeaning (as i am vertuous) to be there. but, that you may know thedeceite and falshoode of your servant, i would have you to put on mynight-gowne, my head attire, and chinne-cloath, and sitting but ashort while there underneath the pine-tree: such is his insatiatedesire, as he will not faile to come, and then you may proceede, asyou finde occasion.
when egano heard these words, sodainely hee started out of bed,saying. doe i foster such a snake in mine owne bosome? gramerciewife for this politicke promise of thine, and beleeve mee, i meaneto follow it effectually. so, on he put his ladies night-gown, herformall head attire and chin-cloth, going presently downe into thegarden, to expect anichinoes comming to the pine-tree. but beforethe matter grew to this issue, let me demand of you faire ladies, inwhat a lamentable condition (as you may imagine) was poore anichino;to bee so strongly detained by her, heare all his amorous suitediscovered, and likely to draw very heavy afflictions on him?undoubtedly, he looked for immediate apprehension by egano,imprisonment and publike punishment for his so malapert presumption:and had it proved so, she had much renowned her selfe, and dealtwith him but as he had justlie deserved.
but frailtie in our feminine sex is too much prevalent, and makes uswander from vertuous courses, when we are wel onward in the way tothem. madam beatrix, whatsoever passed betweene her and anichino, iknow not, but, either to continue this new begunne league forfurther time, or, to be revenged on her husbands implicity, inover-rashlie giving credit to so smooth a ly; this was her advise tohim. anichino, quoth she, take a good cudgell in thy hand, then gointo the garden so farre as the pine; and there, as if formerly thouhadst solicited mee unto this secret meeting, only but by way ofapproving my honestie: in my name, revile thy master so bitterly asthou canst, bestowing manie sound blowes on him with thy cudgel; yeturge the shame stil (as it were) to mee, and never leave him, til thouhast beaten him out of the garden, to teach him keepe his bedanother time such an apt scholler as anichino was in this kind,needs no tutoring, but a word is enough to a ready wit. to thegarden goes he, with a good willow cudgell in his hand, and commingneere to the pine-tree, there he found egano disguised like to hislady, who arising from the place where he sate, went with chearefullgesture to welcome him; but anichino (in rough and stearne manner)thus spake unto him. wicked shamelesse, and most immodest woman, artthou come, according to thine unchaste and lascivious promise?couldest thou so easily credite, (though i tempted thee, to trie thevertue of thy continencie) i would offer such a damnable wrong to myworthy master, that so deerely loves me, and reposeth his especiallconfidence in me? thou art much deceived in me, and shalt finde,that i hate to be false to him.
so lifting up the cudgell, he gave him therewith halfe a scoregood bastinadoes, laying them on soundly, both on his armes andshoulders: and egano feeling the smart of them, durst not speake oneworde, but fled away from him so fast as hee could, anichino stillfollowing, and multiplying many other injurious speeches againsthim, with the epithites of strumpet, lustfull and insatiate woman.go thou lewde beast (quoth he) most unworthy the title of a lady, orto be wife unto so good a natured man, as my mayster is, to whom iwill reveale thy most ungracious incivility to morrow, that he maypunish thee a little better then i have done.
egano being thus well beaten for his garden walke, got within thedoore, and so went up to his chamber againe: his lady theredemanding of him, whether anichino came according to his promise, orno? come?
quoth egano, yes wife, he came, but deerely to my cost: for heeverily taking me for thee, hath beaten me most extreamly, calling mean hundred whores and strumpets, reputing thee to bee the wickedstwoman living. in good sadnesse beatrix, i wondred not a little at him,that he would give thee any such vile speeches, with intent to wrongmee in mine honour. questionlesse, because hee saw thee to bejoviall spirited, gracious and affable towardes all men; therefore heeintended to make triall of thine honest carriage. well sir (saydeshee) twas happy that hee tempted mee with words, and let you tastethe proofe of them by deeds: and let him thinke, that i brooke thosewords as distastably, as you do or can, his ill deeds. but seeing heis so just, faithfull, and loyall to you, you may love him the better,and respect him as you finde occasion.
whereto egano thus replyed. now trust me thou hast said very well:and me wi drawing hence the argument of his setled perswasion; that hehad the chastest woman living to his wife, and so just a servant, ascould not be fellowed: there never was any further discoverie ofthis garden-night accident. perhaps, madame beatrix and anichino mightsubtilly smile thereat in secret, in regard that they knew more thenany other else beside did. but, as for honest meaning egano, hee neverhad so much as the verie least mistrust of ill dealing, either inhis lady, or anichino; whom hee loved and esteemed farre morerespectively uppon this proofe of his honestie towards him, then heewould or could possibly have done, without a triall so playne andpregnant.
the seventh day, the eight novell
whereby appeareth, that an husband ought to be very well advised,
when he meaneth to discover any wrong offered his wife; except
hee him-selfe do rashly run into all the shame and reproach
arriguccio berlinghieri, became immeasurably jelous of his wifesimonida, who fastened a thred about her great toe, for to serve asa small, when her amorous friend should come to visite her. arrigucciofindeth the fallacie, and while he pursueth the amorous friend, sheecauseth her maide to lye in her bed against his returne: whom hebeateth extreamly, cutting away the lockes of her haire (thinking hehad doone all this violence to his wife simonida:) and afterwardfetcheth her mother and brethren, to shame her before them, and sobe rid of her. but they finding all his speeches to be utterlyfalse; and reputing him to bee a drunken jealous foole; all theblame and disgrace falleth on himselfe.
it seemed to the whole assembly, that madam beatrix, dealte somewhatstrangely, in the manner of beguiling her husband; and affirmedalso, that anichino had great cause of fear, when she held him sostrongly by her beds side, and related all his amorous temptation. butwhen the king perceyved, that madame philomena sate silent, heturned to madam neiphila, willing her to supply the next place; whomodestly smiling, thus began.
faire ladies, it were an heavy burthen imposed on me, and a mattermuch surmounting my capacity, if i should vainely imagine, tocontent you with so pleasing a novell, as those have already done,by you so singularly reported: neverthelesse, i must discharge mydutie, and take my fortune as it fals, albeit i hope to finde youmercifull.
you are to know then, that sometime there lived in our citie, a verywelthy merchant, named arriguccio berlinghieri, who (as many merchantshave done) fondly imagined, to make himselfe a gentleman bymarriage. which that he might the more assuredly do, he took to wife agentlewoman, one much above his degree or element, she being namedsimonida. now, in regard that he delighted (as it is the usuall lifeof a merchant) to be often abroad, and little at home, whereby sheehad small benefit of his company; shee grew very forward inaffection with a young gentleman, called signior roberto, who hadsolicited hir by many amorous meanes, and (at length) prevailed to winher favor. which favour being once obtained; affection gaddes so farrebeyond al discretion, and makes lovers so heedelesse of theirprivate conversations: that either they are taken tardy in theirfolly, or else subjected to scandalous suspition.
it came to passe, that arriguccio, either by rumour, or some othermore sensible apprehension, had received such intelligenceconcerning his wife simonida, as he grew into extraordinarie jealousieof her, refraining travaile abroad, as formerly he was wont to doe,and ceassing from his verie ordinary affayres, addicting all hiscare and endeavour, onely to be watchfull of his wife; so that henever durst sleepe, untill she were by him in the bed, which was nomeane mollestation to her, being thus curbd from her familiar meetingswith roberto. neverthelesse, having a long while consulted with herwittes, to find some apte meanes for conversing with him, beingthereto also very earnestlie still solicited by him; you shall hearewhat course she undertooke.
her chamber being on the streete side, and somewhat juttying overit, she observed the disposition of her husband, that every night itwas long before he fell asleepe: but beeing once falne into it, nonoyse whatsoever, could easily wake him. this his solemne and soundsleeping, emboldned her so farre, as to meete with roberto at thestreete doore, which (while her husband slept) softly she would opento him, and therein private converse with him.
but, because shee would know the certaine houre of his comming,without the least suspition of any: she hung a thred forth of herchamber window, descending downe, within the compasse of robertoesreach in the street, and the other end thereof, guided from the windowto the bed, being conveyed under the cloathes, and shee being inbed, she fastned it about her left great toe, wherewith roberto wassufficiently acquainted, and thus enstructed withall; that at hiscomming, he should plucke the thred, and if her husband was in hisdead sleep, she would let go the thred, and come downe to him: butif he slept not, she would hold it strongly, and then his tarryingwould prove but in vaine, there could be no meeting that night.
this devise was highly pleasing both to roberto and simonida,being the intelligencer of their often meeting, and many times alsoadvising the contrary. but in the end, as the quaintest cunning mayfaile at one time or other; so it fortuned one night, that simonidabeing in a sound sleepe, and arriguccio waking, because his drowsiehoure was not yet come: as he extendeth forth his legge in the bed, hefound the thred, which feeling in his hand, and perceiving it was tyedto his wives great toe; it prooved apt tinder to kindle furtherjealousie, and now hee suspected some treachery indeede, and so muchthe rather because the thred guided (under the cloathes) from thebed to the window, and there hanging downe into the streete, as awarning to some further businesse.
now was arriguccio so furiously enflamed, that hee must needes beefurther resolved in this apparant doubt: and because therein hee wouldnot be deceived, softly he cut the thred from his wives toe, andmade it fast about his owne; to trye what successe would ensuethereon. it was not long before roberto came, and according as heeused to doe, hee pluckt the thred, which arriguccio felt, butbecause hee had not tyed it fast, and roberto pulling itover-hardly, it fell downe from the window into his hand, which heunderstood as his lesson, to attend her comming, and so hee did.arriguccio stealing softly out of bed from his wife, and taking hissword under his arme, went downe to the doore, to see who it was, withfull intent of further revenge. now, albeit he was a merchant, yethe wanted not courage, and boldnesse of spirit, and opening thedoore without any noyse, onely as his wife was wont to doe: roberto,there waiting his entrance, perceived by the doores unfashionableopening, that it was not simonida, but her husband, whereupon hebetooke himselfe to flight and arriguccio fiercely followed him. atthe length, roberto perceiving that flight avayled him not, becausehis enemy still pursued him: being armed also with a sword, asarriguccio was; he returned backe upon him, the one offering tooffend, as the other stood upon his defence, and so in the darkethey fought together.
simonida awaking, even when her husband went foorth of thechamber, and finding the thred to be cut from her toe; conjecturedimmediately, that her subtle cunning was discovered, and supposing herhusband in pursuite of roberto, presently she arose; and,considering what was likely to ensue thereon, called her chamber-maide(who was not ignorant of the businesse) and by perswasions prevailedso with her, that she lay downe in her place in the bed, uponsolemne protestations and liberall promises, not to make her selfeknowne, but to suffer all patiently, either blowes, or other ill usageof her husband, which shee would recompence in such bountifull sort,as she should have no occasion to complaine. so, putting out thewatchlight, which every night burned in the chamber, she departedthence, and sate downe in a close corner of the house, to see whatwould be the end of all this stirre, after her husbands comming home.
the fight (as you have formerly heard) continuing betweene robertoand arriguccio, the neighbours hearing of the clashing of their swordsin the streets; arose out of their beds, and reproved them in veryharsh manner. in which respect arriguccio, fearing to be knowne, andignorant also what his adversary was (no harme being as yet done oneither side) permitted him to depart; and extreamely full of anger,returned backe againe to his house. being come up into hisbed-chamber, thus he began; where is this lewde and wicked woman?what? hast thou put out the light, because i should not finde thee?that shall not avayle thee, for i can well enough finde a drab inthe darke. so, groping on to the beds side, and thinking hee had takenholde on his wife, he grasped the chamber-maide, so beating her withhis fists, and spurning her with his feet, that al her face was bloodyand bruised. next, with his knife he cut off a great deal of herhaire, giving her the most villanous speeches as could be devised:swearing, that he would make her a shame to all the world.
you need make no doubt, but the poore maide wept exceedingly, as shehad good occasion to doe: and albeit many times she desired mercy, andthat hee would not bee so cruell to her: yet notwithstanding, hervoyce was so broken with crying, and his impacience so extreame,that rage hindered all power of distinguishing, or knowing his wivestongue from a strangers. having thus madly beaten her, and cut thelockes off from her head, thus he spake to her. wicked woman, and nowife of mine, be sure i have not done with thee yet; for, although imeane not now to beate thee any longer: i will goe to thy brethren,and they shall understand thy dishonest behaviour. then will i bringthem home with me, and they perceiving how much thou hast abusedboth their honour and thine owne; let them deale with thee as theyfinde occasion, for thou art no more a companion for me. no sooner hadhe uttered these angry words, but hee went forth of the chamber,bolting it fast on the outward side, as meaning to keepe her safelyinclosed, and out of the house he went alone by himselfe.
simonida, who had heard all this tempestuous conflict, perceivingthat her husband had lockt the streete doore after him, and was gonewhether he pleased: unbolted the chamber doore, lighted a waxe candle,and went in to see her poore maide, whom she found to be mostpittifully misused. she comforted her as well as she could, broughther into her owne lodging chamber, where washing her face and hurts invery soveraigne waters, and rewarding her liberally witharriguccioes owne gold; she held her selfe to be sufficientlysatisfyed. so, leaving the maide in her lodging, and returning againto her owne chamber: she made up the bed in such former manner, asif no body had lodged therein that night. then hanging up her lampefresh fild with oyle, and clearly lighted, she deckt her selfe in sodecent sort, as if she had bin in no bed all that night.
then taking sowing worke in her hand, either shirts or bands ofher husbands; hanging the lampe by her, and sitting downe at thestayres head, she fell to worke in very serious manner, as if shee hadundertaken some imposed taske.
on the other side, arriguccio had travelled so farre from his house,till he came at last to the dwelling of simonidaes brethren: where heeknockt so soundly, that he was quickely heard, and (almost asspeedily) let in. simonidaes brethren, and her mother also, hearing ofarriguccioes comming thither so late. rose from their beds, and eachof them having a waxe candle lighted, came presently to him, tounderstand the cause of this his so unseasonable visitation.arriguccio, beginning at the originall of the matter, the thredfound tyed about his wives great toe, the fight and housholdconflict after following: related every circumstance to them. andfor the better proofe of his words, he shewed them the thred it selfe,the lockes supposed of his wives haire, and adding withall; thatthey might now dispose of simonida as themselves pleased, becauseshe should remaine no longer in his house.
the brethren to simonida were exceedingly offended at this relation,in regard they beleeved it for truth, and in this fury, commandedtorches to be lighted, preparing to part thence with arriguccio hometo his house, for the more sharpe reprehension of their sister.which when their mother saw, she followed them weeping, firstentreating one, and then the other, not to be over rash in creditingsuch a slander, but rather to consider the truth thereof advisedly:because the husband might be angry with his wife upon some otheroccasion, and having outraged her, made this the meanes in excuse ofhimselfe. moreover she said, that she could not chuse but wondergreatly, how this matter should thus come to passe: because she hadgood knowledge of her daughter, during the whole course of hereducation, faultlesse and blamelesse in every degree; with manyother good words of her beside, as proceeding from naturallaffection of a mother.
being come to the house of arriguccio, entring in, and ascendingup the stayres: they heard simonida sweetly singing at her working;but pausing, upon hearing their rude trampling, shee demaunded, whowas there. one of the angry brethren presently answered: lewde womanas thou art, thou shalt know soone enough who is heere: our blessedlady be with us (quoth simonida) and sweet saint frances helpe todefend me, who dare use such unseemely speeches? starting up andmeeting them on the staire head: kinde brethren, (said she) is it you?what, and my loving mother too? for sweet saint charities sake, whatmay be the reason of your comming hither in this manner. shee beingset downe againe to her worke, so neatly apparelled, without any signeof outrage offered her, her face unblemished, her haire comelyordered, and differing wholly from the former speeches of her husband:the brethren marvelled thereat not a little; and asswaging somewhatthe impetuous torrent of their rage, began to demaund in cooleblood, (as it were) from what ground her husbands complaintsproceeded, and threatning her roughly, if she would not confesse thetruth intirely to them.
ave maria (quoth simonida, crossing her selfe) alas dearebrethren, i know not what you say, or meane, nor wherein my husbandshould bee offended, or make any complaint at all of me. arrigucciohearing this looked on her like a man that had lost his senses: forwell he remembred, how many cruell blowes he had given her on theface, beside scratches of his nailes, and spurnes of his feet, as alsothe cutting of her haire, the least shew of all which misusage, wasnot now to be seene. her brethren likewise briefly told her, the wholeeffect of her husbands speeches, shewing her the thred, and in whatcruell manner he sware hee did beate her. simonida, turning then toher husband, and seeming as confounded with amazement, said. how isthis husband? what doe i heare? would you have me supposed (to yourowne shame and disgrace) to be a bad woman, and your selfe a cruellcurst man, when (on either side) there is no such matter? when wereyou this night heere in the house with mee? or when should you beatemee, and i not feele nor know it? beleeve me (sweete heart) allthese are meerely miracles to me.
now was arriguccio ten times more mad in his minde, then before,saying. divell, and no woman, did wee not this night goe both togetherto bed? did not i cut this thred from thy great toe, tyed it tomine, and found the craftie compact betweene thee and thy minnion? didnot i follow and fight with him in the streets? came i not backeagaine, and beate thee as a strumpet should be? and are not thesethe locks of haire, which i my selfe did cut from thy bead?
alas sir (quoth she) where have you been? doe you know what you say?you did not lodge in this house this night, neither did i see youall the whole day and night, till now.
but leaving this, and come to the matter now in question, becausei have no other testimony then mine owne words. you say, that youdid beate me, and cut those lockes of haire from my head. alas sir,why should you slander your selfe? in all your life time you did neverstrike me. and to approve the truth of my speeches, doe you yourselfe, and all else heere present, looke on me advisedly, if any signeof blow or beating is to be seene on me. nor were it an easie matterfor you to doe either to smite, or so much as lay your hand (in anger)on me, it would cost dearer then you thinke for. and whereas yousay, that you did cut those lockes of haire from my head; it is morethen either i know, or felt, nor are they in colour like to mine: but,because my mother and brethren shall be my witnesses therein, andwhether you did it without my knowledge; you shall all see, if they becut, or no. so, taking off her head attyre, she displayed her hayreover her shoulders, which had suffered no violence, neither seemedto bee so much as uncivilly or rudely handled.
when the mother and brethren saw this, they began to murmure againstarriguccio, saying. what thinke you of this sir? you tell us ofstrange matters which you have done, and all proving false, wewonder how you can make good the rest. arriguccio looked wilde, andconfusedly, striving still to maintaine his accusation: but seeingevery thing to bee flatly against him, he durst not attempt tospeake one word. simonida tooke advantage of this distraction inhim, and turning to her brethren, saide. i see now the marke whereathe aymeth, to make me doe what i never meante: namely, that i shouldacquaint you with his vile qualities, and what a wretched life i leadewith him, which seeing hee will needes have me to reveale; bearewith me if i doe it upon compulsion.
mother and brethren, i am verily perswaded, that those accidentswhich he disclosed to you, hath doubtlesse (in the same manner)happened to him, and you shall heare how. very true it is, that thisseeming honest man, to whom (in a lucklesse houre) you married me,stileth himselfe by the name of a merchant, coveting to be soaccounted and credited, as holy in outward appearance, as areligious monke, and as demure in lookes, as the modestest maide: likea notorious common drunkard, is a taverne hunter, where making hisluxurius matches, one while with one whore, then againe withanother; hee causeth mee every night to sit tarrying for him, evenin the same sort as you found me: sometimes till midnight, andotherwhiles till broad day light in the morning.
and questionlesse, being in his wounted drunken humour, hee hathlyen with one of his sweet consorts, about whose toe he found thethred, and finding her as false to him, as he hath alwayes been to me:did not onely beat her, but also cut the haire from her head. andhaving not yet recovered his sences, is verily perswaded, and cannotbe altered from it; but that hee performed all this villany to me. andif you doe but advisedly observe his countenance, he appeareth yetto be more then halfe drunke.
but whatsoever he hath said concerning me, i make no account atall thereof, because he spake it in his drunkennesse, and as freely asi forgive him, even so (good mother and kinde brethren,) let meeentreate you to do the like.
when the mother had heard these words, and confidently beleevedher daughter: she began to torment her selfe with anger, saying. bythe faith of my body daughter, this unkindnesse is not [to] beendured, but rather let the dogge be hanged, that his qualities may beknowne, he being utterly unworthy, to have so good a woman to hiswife, as thou art. what could he have done if he had taken thee in theopen more, and in company of some wanton gallants? in an unfortunatehoure wast thou married to him, base jealous coxecombe as he is, andit is quite against sense, or reason, that thou shouldest be subjectto his fooleries. what was hee, but a merchant of eale-skinnes ororenges, bred in some paltry countrey village; taken fromhogge-rubbing; clothed in sheepes-sattin, with clownish startops,leather stockings, and caddies garters: his whole habite not worththree shillings: and yet he must have a faire gentlewoman to his wife,of honest fame, riches and reputation; when, comparing his pedegreewith hers, hee is farre unfit to wipe her shooes.
oh my deare sonnes, i would you had followed my counsell, andpermitted her to mate in the honourable family of count guido, whichwas much mooved, and seriously pursued. but you would needs bestow heron this goodly jewell; who, although shee is one of the choysestbeauties in florence, chaste, honest and truely vertuous: is notashamed at midnight, to proclaime her for a common whore, as if we hadno better knowledge of her. but by the blessed mother of saint john,if you would be ruled by mine advise; our law should make himdearely smart for it.
alas my sonnes, did i not tell you at home in our owne house, thathis words were no way likely to prove true? have not your eyesobserved his unmannerly behaviour to your sister? if i were as youare, hearing what he hath said, and noting his drunken carriagebeside; i should never give over, as long as he had any life left inhim. and were i a man, as i am a woman, none other then my selfeshould revenge her wrongs, making him a publike spectacle to alldrabbing drunkards.
when the brethren had heard and observed all these occurrences; inmost bitter manner they railed on arriguccio, bestowing some goodbastinadoes on him beside, concluding thus with him in the end.quoth one of them, wee will pardon this shamefull abusing of oursister, because thou art a notorious drunkard: but looke to it (onperill of thy life) that we have no more such newes hereafter; for,beleeve it unfainedly, if any such impudent rumours happen to oureares, or so much as a flying fame thereof; thou shalt surely be paidefor both faults together.
so home againe went they, and arriguccio stood like one that hadneither life or motion, not knowing (whether what he had done) wastrue, or no, or if he dreamed all this while, and so (without utteringany word) he left his wife, and went quietly to bed. thus by herwisdome, she did not onely prevent an imminent perill: but also made afree and open passage, to further contentment with her amourousfriend, yet dreadlesse of any distaste or suspition in her husband.
the seventh day, the ninth novell
wherein is declared, that great lords may sometime be deceived by
their wives, as well as men of meaner condition
lydia, a lady of great beauty, birth, and honor, being wife tonicostratus, governour of argos, falling in love with a gentleman,named pyrrhus; was requested by him (as a true testimony of herunfeigned affection) to performe three severall actions of herselfe. she did accomplish them all, and imbraced and kissed pyrrhus inthe presence of nicostratus; by perswading him, that whatsoever hesaw, was meerely false.
the novell delivered, by madame neiphila, seemed so pleasing toall the ladies; as they could not refraine from hearty laughter,beside much liberality of speech. albeit the king did oftentimesurge silence, and commanded pamphilus to follow next. so, whenattention was admitted, pamphilus began in this order. i am ofopinion, faire ladies, that there is not any matter, how uneasie ordoubtfull soever it may seeme to be; but the man or woman thataffecteth fervently, dare boldly attempt, and effectuallyaccomplish. and this perswasion of mine, although it hath beenesufficiently approved, by many of our passed novels: yetnotwithstanding, i shall make it much apparent to you, by a presentdiscourse of mine owne. wherein i have occasion to speake of a lady,to whom fortune was more favourable, then either reason orjudgement, could give direction. in which regard, i would not adviseany of you, to entertaine so high an imagination of minde, as totracke her footsteps of whom i am now to speake: because fortunecontaineth not alwayes one and the same disposition, neither can allmens eyes be blinded after one manner. and so proceed we to our tale.
in argos, a most ancient citie of achaya, much more renowned byher precedent kings, then wealth, or any other great matter ofworth: there lived as lieutenant or governour thereof, a noble lord,named nicostratus, on whom (albeit hee was well stept into yeares)fortune bestowed in marriage a great lady, no lesse bold of spirit,then choisely beautifull. nicostratus, abounding in treasure andwealthy possessions, kept a goodly traine of servants, horses,houndes, hawkes, and what else not, as having an extraordinaryfelicity in all kinds of game, as singular exercises to maintainehis health.
among his other servants and followers, there was a yonggentleman, gracefull of person, excellent in speech, and every wayas active as no man could be more: his name pyrrhus, highly affectedof nicostratus, and more intimately trusted then all the rest. suchseemed the perfections of this pyrrhus, that lydia (for so was thelady named) began to affect him very earnestly, and in such sort, asday or night shee could take no rest, but devised all meanes tocompasse her harts desire. now, whether he observed this inclinationof her towards him, or else would take no notice thereof, it could notbe discerned by any outward apprehension: which moved the moreimpatiency in her, and drove her hopes to dispairing passions. whereinto finde some comfort and ease, she called an ancient gentlewoman ofher chamber, in whom shee reposed especiall confidence, and thus shespake to her.
lesca, the good turnes and favours thou hast received from me,should make thee faithfull and obedient to me: and therefore set alocke uppon thy lippes, for revealing to any one whatsoever, suchmatters as now i shall impart to thee; except it be to him that icommand thee. thou perceivest lesca, how youthfull i am, apt to allsprightly recreations, rich, and abounding in all that a woman canwish to have, in regard of fortunes common and ordinary favours: yet ihave one especiall cause of complaint: namely, the inequality of mymariage, my husband being over-ancient for me; in which regard, myyouth finds it selfe too highly wronged, being defeated of thoseduties and delights, which women (farre inferiour to me) arecontinuallie cloyed withall, and i am utterly deprived of. i amsubject to the same desires they are, and deserve to taste the benefitof them, in as ample manner, as they do or can.
hitherto i have lived with the losse of time, which yet (in somemeasure) may be releeved and recompenced: for, though fortune weremine enemy in mariage, by such a disproportion of our conditions:yet she may befriend in another nature, and kindely redeeme the injurydone me. wherefore lesca, to be as compleate in this case, as i amin all the rest beside; i have resolved upon a private friend, and onemore worthy then any other, namely, my servant pyrrhus, whose youthcarieth some correspondency with mine; and so constantly have i setledmy love to him, as i am not well, but when i thinke on him, or seehim: and (indeede) shall dye, except the sooner i may enjoy him. andtherefore, if my life and well-fare be respected by thee, let himunderstand the integrity of mine affection, by such good means as thoufindest it most expedient to be done: entreating him from me, that imay have some conference with him, when he shall thereto besolicited by me.
the chamber-gentlewoman lesca, willingly undertooke the ladiesembassie; and so soone as opportunity did favor her: having withdrawnepyrrhus into an apt and commodious place, shee delivered the messageto him, in the best manner she could devise. which pyrrhus hearing,did not a little wonder thereat, never having noted any such matter;and therefore sodainly conceyved, that the lady did this onely totry him; whereupon, somewhat roundly and roughly, hee returned thisanswere. lesca, i am not so simple, as to credite any such messageto be sent from my lady, and therefore be better advised of thy words.but admit that it should come from her, yet i cannot be perswaded,that her soule consented to such harsh language, far differing froma forme so full of beuty. and yet admit againe, that her hart andtongue herein were relatives: my lord and master hath so farrehonoured mee, and so much beyond the least part of merite in mee: as iwill rather dye, then any way offer to disgrace him: and therefore icharge thee, never more to move mee in this matter.
lesca, not a jot danted at his stearne words, presently she saide.pyrrhus, both in this and all other messages my lady shall command me,i wil speake to thee whensoever shee pleaseth, receive what discontentthou canst thereby; or make presumption of what doubts thou maistdevise. but as i found thee a senselesse fellow, dull, and notshaped to any understanding, so i leave thee: and in that anger partedfrom him, carrying backe the same answer to her lady. she no soonerheard it, but instantly shee wished her selfe to be dead; and withinsome few dayes after, she conferred againe with her chamber-woman,saying. lesca, thou knowest well enough, that the oxe falleth not atthe first blow of the axel neither is the victory won, upon a sillyand shallow adventure: wherefore, i thinke it convenient, that oncemore thou shouldst make another tryall of him, who (in prejudice tome) standeth so strictly on his loyalty, and choosing such an houre asseemeth most commodious, soundly possesse him with my tormentingpassions. bestirre thy wittes, and tippe thy tongue with a womanseloquence, to effect what i so earnestly desire: because, bylanguishing in this lovesicke affliction, it will bee the danger of mydeath, and some severe detriment to him, to be the occasion of sogreat a losse.
lesca, comforted her lady, so much as lay in her power to doe, andhaving sought for pyrrhus, whom she found at good leysure; and, in apleasing humor, thus she beganne. pyrrhus, some few dayes since itolde thee, in what extreame agonies thy lady and mine was, onely inregarde of her love to thee: and now againe i come once more, togive thee further assurance thereof: wherefore, beleeve itunfeignedly, that if thy obstinacie continue still, in like manneras the other day it did, expect very shortly to heare the tydings ofher death.
it is my part therefore, to entreat thee, to comfort her longlanguishing desires: but if thou persist in thy harsh opinion, instead of reputing thee a wise and fortunate yong man, i shall confessethee to bee an ignoraunt asse. what a glorie is it to thee, to beaffected of so faire and worthy a lady, beyond all men elsewhatsoever? next to this, tell me, how highly maist thou confessethy self beholding to fortune, if thou but duly consider, how sheehath elected thee as sole soveraigne of her hopes, which is a crowneof honour to thy youth and a sufficient refuge against all wants andnecessities? where is any to thy knowledge like thy selfe, that canmake such advantage of his time, as thou maist do, if thou wertwise? where canst thou find any one to go beyond thee in armes,horses, sumptuous garments, and gold, as will be heaped on thee, iflydia may be the lady of thy love? open then thine understanding to mywords, returne into thine owne souie, and bee wise for thy selfe.
remember (pyrrhus) that fortune presents her selfe but once beforeany one, with cheerefull lookes, and her lappe wide open of richestfavours, where if choice be not quickely made, before she folde it up,not quic and turn her backe; let no complaint afterward be made ofher, if the fellow that had so faire an offer, proove to be miserable,wretched, and a begger, only thorow his owne negligence. beside,what else hath formerly bin saide, there is now no such neede ofloyaltie in servants to their ladies, as should be among deare friendsand kindred: but servants ought rather (as best they may) be such totheir masters, as they are to them. doest thou imagine, that if thouhadst a faire wife, mother, daughter, or sister, pleasing in the eyeof our nicostratus; he would stand on such nice tearmes of duty orloyaltie, as now thou doest to his ladie? thou wert a verie foole torest so perswaded. assure thy selfe, that if entreaties and fairemeans might not prevalle, force, and compulsion (whatsoever ensuedthereon) woulde winne the masterie. let us then use them, and thecommodities unto them belonging, as they would us and ours. use thebenefit of thy fortune, and beware of abusing her favour. she yetsmiles on thee; but take heede least she turne her backe, it will thenbe over-late to repent thy folly. and if my ladie die through thydisdaine, be assured, that thou canst not escape with life, besideopen shame and disgrace for ever.
pyrrhus, who had often considered on lescaes first message,concluded with himselfe; that if any more she moved the same matter:hee would returne her another kinde of answere, wholly yeelding tocontent his lady; provided, that he might remaine assured,concerning the intyre truth of the motion, and that it was not urgedonely to trie him, wherefore, thus he replyed. lesca, do not imaginemee so ignorant, as not to know the certaintie of all thy formerallegations, confessing them as freely as thou doest, or canst. butyet let mee tell thee withall, that i knowe my lord to be wise andjudicious, and having committed all his affaires to my care and trust:never blame mee to misdoubt, least my ladie (by his counsell andadvice) make thee the messenger of this motion, therby to call myfidelitie in question.
to cleare which doubt, and for my further assurance of her wellmeanning toward me; if she wil undertake the performance of three suchthings as i must needes require in this case: i am afterward her owne,in any service she can command me. the first of them, is; that inthe presence of my lord and master, she kill his faire faulcon,which so dearly hee affecteth. the second, to send me a locke ortuft of his beard, being puld away with her owne hand. the third andlast, with the same hand also, to pluck out one of his best andsoundest teeth, and send it mee as her loves true token. when ifinde all these three effectually performed, i am wholly hers, and notbefore.
these three strict impositions, seemed to lesca, and her ladielikewise, almost beyond the compasse of all possibility. nevertheleslove, being a powerfull oratour in perswading, as also adventurouseven on the most difficult dangers; gave her courage to undertake themall: sending lesca backe againe to him, with full assurance, ofthese more then herculean labours. moreover, her selfe did intend toadde a fourth taske, in regard of his strong opinion concerning thegreat wisedome of his lord and maister. after she had effected all theother three, she would not permit him to kisse her, but before hislords face: which yet should be accomplished in such sort, asnicostratus himselfe should not beleeve it, although apparantly he sawit. well, (quoth pyrrhus) when all these wonders are performed, assuremy ladie. that i am truelie hers.
within a short while after, nicostratus made a solemne feastival(accorling as yearely he used to doe) in honour of his birth day,inviting many lords and ladies thereto. on which rejoycing day, sosoone as dinner was ended, and the tables withdrawne: lydia cameinto the great hall, where the feast was solemnly kept; very richand costly apparrelled; and there, in presence of pyrrhus, and thewhole assemblie, going to the perch whereon the faulcone sate, whereinher husband tooke no little delight, and having untyed her, as if sheemeant to beare her on her fist: tooke her by the jesses, and beatingher against the wal, killed her. nicostratus beholding this, calledout aloud unto her, saying. alas madame! what have you done? shemaking him no answere, but turning to the lords and ladies, whichhad dined there, spake in this manner.
ill should i take revenge on a king, that had offended me, if ihad not so much heart, as to wreake my spleene on a paltry hawke.understand then, worthy lords and ladies, that this faulcone hath longtime robbed me of those delights, which men (in meere equitie) oughtto have with their wives: because continually, so as breake of dayhath appeared, my husband, starting out of bed, makes him selfereadie, presently to horsse, and with this faulcon on his fist,rides abroad to his recreation in the fields. and i, in suchforsaken sort as you see, am left all alone in my bed, discontentedand despised: often vowing to my selfe, to bee thus revenged as nowi am, being with-held from it by no other occasion, but onely wantof a fit and apt time, to do it in the presence of such persons, asmight bee just judges of my wrongs, and as i conceive you all to be.
the lords and ladies hearing these words, and beleeving this deed ofhers to be done no otherwise, but out of her entire affection tonicostratus, according as her speeches sounded: compassionatelyturning towards him (who was exceedingly displeased) and allsmiling, said. now in good sadnesse sir; madame lydia hath done wellin acting her just revenge upon the hawke, that bereft her of herhusbands kinde companie; then which nothing is more precious to aloving wife, and a hell it is to live without it. and lydia, beingsodainly with. into her chamber; with much other friendly and familiartalke, they converted the anger of nicostratus into mirth and smiling.
pyrrhus, who had diligently observed the whole cariage of thisbusinesse, saide to himselfe. my ladie hath begun well, and proceedingon with no worse successe, will (no doubt) bring her love to anhappy conclusion. as for the lady her selfe, she having thus kildthe hawke, it was no long while after, but being in the chamber withher husband, and they conversing familiarly together; she began tojest with him, and hee in the like manner with her, tickling andtoying each the other, till at the length she played with his beard,and now she found occasion aptly serving, to effect the second taskeimposed by pyrrhus. so, taking fast hold on a small tuft of his beard,she gave a sodaine snatch, and plucked it away quite from his chin.whereat nicostratus beeing angerly moved, she (to appease hisdistaste) pleasantly thus spake. how now my lord? why do you lookeso frowningly? what? are you angry for a few loose haires of yourbeard? how then should i take it, when you plucke mee by the haireof my head, and yet i am not a jot discontented, because i know you doit but in jesting manner? these friendly speeches cut off allfurther contention, and she kepte charily the tuft of er husbandsbeard, which (the verie selfe-same day) shee sent to pyrrhus herhearts chosen friend.
but now concerning the third matter to be adventured, it drove herto a much more serious consideration, then those two which shee hadalready so well and exactly performed. notwithstanding, like a ladieof unconquerable spirit, and (in whom) love enlarged his power moreand more: she sodainly conceited, what course was best to bee keptin this case, forming her attempt in this manner. upon nicostratuswayted two young gentlemen, as pages of his chamber, whose fathers hadgiven them to his service, to learne the manners of honourablecourtship, and those qualities necessarily required in gentlemen.one of them, when nicostratus sate downe to dinner or supper, stood inoffice of his carver, delivering him all the meats whereon he fed. theother (as taster) attended on his cup, and he dranke no otherdrinke, but what hee brought him, and they both were highly pleasingunto him.
on a day, lydia called these two youths aside; and, among some otherspeeches, which served but as an induction to her intended policy; sheperswaded them, that their mouths yeelded an unsavoury andilpleasing smell, whereof their lord seemed to take dislike. whereforeshe advised them, that at such times as they attended on him intheir severall places: they should (so much as possibly they could)withdraw their heads aside from him, because their breath might not benoyous unto him. but withall, to have an especiall care, of notdisclosing to any one, what she had told them; because (out of meerelove) she had acquainted them therewith: which very coistantly theybeleeved, and followed the same direction as she had advised, beingloath to displease, where service bound them to obey. choosing atime fitting for her purpose, when nicostratus was in privateconference with her, thus she began. sir, you observe not thebehaviour of your two pages, when they wait on you at the table? yesbut i do wife (quoth he) how squemishly they turn their heads asidefrom me, and it hath often bin in my minde, to understand a reason whythey do so.
seating her selfe by him, as if shee had some weighty matter to tellhim; she proceeded in this manner. alas my lord, you shall not need toquestion them, because i can sufficiently resolve you therein: which(neverthelesse) i have long concealed, because i would not beoffensive to you. but in regard, it is now manifestly apparant, thatothers have tasted, what (i immagined) none but my selfe did, i willno longer hide it from you. assuredly sir, there is a most strange andunwonted ill-savour, continually issuing from your mouth, smellingmost noysomely, and i wonder what should be the occasion. in formertimes, i never felt any such foule breathing to come from you: andyou, who do dally converse with so many worthy persons, should seekemeanes to be rid of so great an annoyance. you say verie true wife(answered nicostratus) and i protest to you on my credite, i feeleno such ill smell, neither know what should cause it, except i havesom corrupted tooth in my mouth. perhaps sir (quoth she) it may be so,and yet you feele not the savour which others do, yea, veryoffensively.
so, walking with her to a window, he opened wide his mouth, thewhich nicely shee surveyed on either side, and, turning her headfrom him, as seeming unable to endure the savour: starting, andshrieking out alowd, she said. santa maria! what a sight is this? alasmy good lord, how could you abide this, and for so long a while? heereis a tooth on this side, which (so farre as i can perceive) is notonely hollow and corrupted: but also wholly putrified and rotten,and if it continue still in your head, beleeve it for a truth, that itwill infect and spoile all the rest neere it. i would thereforecounsell you, to let it be pluckt out, before it breede your furtherdanger. i like your counsell well lydia, replyed nicostratus, andpresently intend to follow it; let therefore my barber be sent for,and, without any longer delay, he shall plucke it forth instantly.
how sir? (quoth she,) your barber? uppon mine honour, there shallcome no barber heere. why sir, it is such a rotten tooth, and standethso fairely for my hand: that, without helpe or advice of any barber,let mee alone for plucking it forth without putting you to any paineat all. moreover, let me tell you sir, those tooth-drawers are so rudeand cruell, in performing such offices, as my heart cannot endure,that you should come within compasse of their currish courtesie,neither shall you sir, if you will be ruled by me. if i should failein the manner of their facilitie, yet love and duty hath enstructedme, to forbeare your least paining, which no unmannerly barber willdo.
having thus spoken, and he well contented with her kinde offer,the instruments were brought, which are used in such occasions, allbeing commanded forth of the chamber, but onely lesca, who evermorekept still in her company. so, locking fast the doore, and nicostratusbeing seated, as she thought fittest for her purpose, she put thetanacles into his mouth, catching fast hold on one of his soundestteeth: which, notwithstanding his loud crying, lesca held him sostrongly, that forth she pluckt it, and hid it, having another toothreadie made hot, and bloody, very much corrupted and rotten, which shehelde in the tanacles, and shewed to him, who was well-neere halfedead with anguish. see sir (quoth she) was this tooth to be sufferedin your head, and to yeeld so foule a smell as it did? he verilybeleeving what she said, albeit hee had endured extreame paine, andstill complained on her harsh and violent pulling it out: rejoycedyet, that he was now ridde of it, and she comforting him on the oneside, and the anguish asswaging him on the other, he departed forth ofthe chamber.
in the mean while, by lesca she sent the sound tooth to pyrrhus, who(wondering not a little at her so many strange attempts, which heeurged so much the rather, as thinking their performance impossible,and in meere loyall duty to his lord) seeing them all three to benotably effected; he made no further doubt of her intire love towardeshim, but sent her assurance likewise, of his readinesse andserviceable diligence, whensoever she would command him.
now, after the passage of all these adventures, hardly to beeundertaken by any other woman: yet she held them insufficient forhis security, in the grounded perswasion of her love to him, exceptshee performed another of her owne, and according as shee had boldlypromised. houres do now seeme dayes, and dayes multiplicitie ofyeeres, till the kisse may be given, and receyved in the presence ofnicostratus, yet hee himselfe to avouch the contrary.
madam lydia (upon a pretended sicknesse) keepeth her chamber, and aswomen can hardly be exceeded in dissimulation: so, shee wanted no wit,to seeme exquisitely cunning, in all the outwarde apparances ofsicknesse. one day after dinner, shee being visited by nicostratus,and none attending on him but pyrrhus onely: she earnestlyentreated, that as a mitigation, to some inward afflictions whichshe felt, they would helpe to guide her into the garden.
most gladly was her motion graunted, and nicostratus gently takingher by one arme, and pyrrhus by the other, so they conducted herinto the garden, seating her in a faire floury grasse-plot, with herbacke leaning to a peare-tree. having sitten there an indifferentwhile, and pyrrhus, being formerly enstructed, in the directions whichshe had given him, thus shee spake, some-what faintly. pyrrhus, i havea kinde of longing desire upon a sodaine, to taste of these peares:wherefore, climbe up into the tree, and cast me downe one or two;which instantly hee did. being aloft in the tree, and throwing downesome of the best and ripest peares; at length (according to hispremeditated lesson) looking downe, he said.
forbeare my lord, do you not see, in how weake and feeblecondition my ladie is, being shaken with so violent a sicknesse? andyou madam, how kinde and loving soever you are to my lord, are youso little carefull of your health, being but now come forth of yoursicke chamber, to be ruffled and tumbled in such rough manner?though such dalliances are not amisse in you both; being fitter forthe private chamber, then an open garden, and in the presence of aservant: yet time and place should alwaies bee respectivelyconsidered, for the avoiding of ill example, and better testimonieof your owne wisedomes, which ever should be like your selves. butif so soone, and even in the heate of a yet turbulent sicknesse,your equall love can admit these kisses and embraces: your privatelodginges were much more convenient, where no servants eye can seesuch wantonnesse, nor you be reproved of indiscretion, for being toopublique in your familiaritie. madame lydia, sodainely starting, andturning unto her husband, sayde. what doth pyrrhus prate? is he wellin his wittes? or is he franticke? no madame, replyed pyrrhus, i amnot franticke. are you so fond as to thinke that i do not see yourfolly? nicostratus wondering at his words, presently answered. nowtrust me pyrrhus, i think thou dreamest. no my lord, replyedpyrrhus, i dreame not a jot, neither do you, or my ladie: but ifthis tree could affoord the like kindnesse to me, as you do to her,there would not a peare bee left uppon it. how now pyrrhus? (quothlydia) this language goeth beyond our understanding, it seemeth thouknowest not what thou saist. beleeve me husband, if i were as wellas ever i have bin, i would climb this tree, to see those idle wonderswhich hee talketh of: for, while he continueth thus above, itappeareth, hee can finde no other prattle, albeit he taketh hismarke amisse.
heereupon, he commanded pyrrhus to come downe, and being on theground: now pyrrhus (quoth he) tell me what thou saydst. pyrrhus,pretending an alteration into much amazement, straungely looking abouthim, saide; i know not verie well (my lord) what answere i should makeyou, fearing least my sight hath bin abused by error: for when i wasaloft in that tree, it seemed manifestly to me: that you embraced mylady (though somewhat rudely, in regard of her perillous sicknesse,yet lovingly) and as youthfully as in your yonger dales, with infinitekisses, and wanton dalliances, such as (indeede) deserved a far moreprivate place in my poore opinion. but in my descending downe, meethought you gave over that amorous familiaritie, and i found youseated as i left you. now trust mee pyrrhus, answered nicostratus, thytongue and wit have very strangely wandred, both from reason and allreall apprehension: because we never stirred from hence, since thoudidst climbe up into the tree, neither mooved otherwise, then as nowthou seest us. alas my lord (saide pyrrhus) i humbly crave pardonfor my presumption, in reprooving you for medling with your owne:which shal make me hereafter better advised, in any thing whatsoever i heare or see.
mervaile and amazement, encreased in nicostratus far greater thenbefore, hearing him to avouch still so constantly what he had seene,no contradiction being able to alter him, which made him rashly sweareand say. i will see my selfe, whether this peare-tree bee enchanted,or no: and such wonders to be seene when a man is up in it, as thouwouldst have us to beleeve. and being mounted up so hy, that they weresafe from his sodaine comming on them, lydia had soone forgotten hersicknes, and the promised kisse cost her above twenty more, besideverie kinde and hearty embraces, as lovingly respected and entertainedby pyrrhus. which nicostratus beholding aloft in the tree; cryed outto her, saying. wicked woman, what doest thou meane? and thouvillain pyrrhus, darst thou abuse thy lord, who hath reposed so muchtrust in thee? so, descending in haste downe againe, yet crying soto them still: lydia replyed, alas my lord, why do you raile andrave in such sort? so, he( found her seated as before, and pyrrhuswaiting with dutiful reverence, even as when he climbed up the tree:but yet he thought his sight not deceyved, for all their demure andformall behaviour, which made him walke up and downe, extreamelyfuming and fretting unto himselfe, and which in some milder mannerto qualifie, pyrrhus spake thus to him.
i deny not (my good lord) but freely confesse, that even as yourselfe, so i, being above in the tree, had my sight most falselydeluded: which is so apparantly confirmed by you, and in the samesort, as there needeth no doubt of both our beguiling; in one andthe same suspitious nature. in which case to be the more assuredlyresolved, nothing can be questioned, but whether your beleefe do sofarre misleade you, as to thinke, that my ladie (who hath alwayes benemost wise, loyall, and vertuous,) would so shamefullie wrong you: yea,and to performe it before your face, wherein i dare gadge my life tothe contrary. concerning my selfe, it is not fit for mee, to argueor contest in mine owne commendation: you that have ever knowne thesincerity of my service, are best able to speake in my behalfe: andrather wold i be drawne in peeces with foure wilde horses, then beesuch an injurious slave to my lord and master.
now then, it can be no otherwise, but we must needs restcertainely perswaded, that the guile and offence of this falseappearance, was occasioned by thee onely. for all the world couldnot make me otherwise beleeve, but that i saw you kisse and mostkindely imbrace my lady: if your owne eyes had not credited the likebehaviour in me to her, of which sinne, i never conceived so much as athought. the lady (on the other side) seeming to be very angerlyincensed, starting faintly up on her feet, yet supporting her selfe bythe tree, said. it appeareth sir, that you have entertained a goodlyopinion of me, as, if i were so lewde and lasciviously disposed, oraddicted to the very least desire of wantonnesse: that i would beeso forgetfull of mine owne honour, as to adventure it in your sight,and with a servant of my house? oh sir, such women as are sofamiliarly affected, need learne no wit of men in amourous matters;their private chambers shall be better trusted, then an open blabingand tell-tale garden.
nicostratus, who verily beleeved what they had both said, and thatneither of them would adventure such familiarity before his face:would talke no more of the matter, but rather studyed of the rarity ofsuch a miracle, not seene, but in the height of the tree, and changingagaine up on the descent. but lydia, containing still hercollourable kinde of impatience, and angerly frowning uponnicostratus, stearnely saide. if i may have my will, this villanousand deceiving tree, shall never more shame me, or any other woman: andtherefore pyrrhus, runne for an axe, and by felling it to theground, in an instant, revenge both thy wrong and mine. doest not thouserve a worthy lord? and have not i a wise husband, who, without anyconsideration, will suffer the eye of his understanding to be sodazeled, with a foolish imagination beyond all possibility? for,although his eyes did apprehend such a folly, and it seemed to be atruth indeed: yet, in the depth of setled judgement, all the worldshould not perswade him, that it was so.
pyrrhus had quickely brought the axe, and hewing downe the tree,so soone as the lady saw it fall; turning her selfe to nicostratus,she said. now that i have seene mine honour and honesties enemy laidalong; mine anger is past, and husband, i freely pardon you:intreating you heartily henceforward, not to presume or imagine,that my love eyther is, or can bee altred from you.
thus the mocked and derided nicostratus, returned in againe with hislady and pyrrhus; where perhaps (although the peare-tree was cutdowne) they could find as cunning meanes to over-reach him.
the seventh day, the tenth novell
wherein such men are covertly reprehended, who make no care or
conscience at all of those things that should preserve
them from sinne
two citizens of siena, the one named tingoccio mini, and the othermeucio di tura, affected both one woman, called monna mita, to whomthe one of them was a gossip. the gossip dyed, and appearedafterward to his companion, according as he had formerly promisedhim to doe, and tolde him what strange wonders he had seene in theother world.
now there remained none but the king himselfe, last of all torecount his novell; who, after hee heard the ladies complaintsindifferently pacified, for the rash felling downe of such aprecious peare-tree; thus he began. faire ladies, it is a case morethen manifest, that every king, who will be accounted just andupright: should first of all, and rather then any other, observe thoselawes which he himselfe hath made; otherwise he ought to be reputed asa servant, worthy of punishment, and no king. into which fault andreprehension, i your king, shall well neere be constrained to fall;for yesterday i enacted a law, upon the forme of our discoursing, withfull intent, that this day i would not use any part of mypriviledge; but being subject (as you all are) to the same law, ishould speake of that argument, which already you have done.
wherein, you have not onely performed more then i could wish, upon asubject so sutable to my minde: but in every novell, such variety ofexcellent matter, such singular illustrations, and delicateeloquence hath flowne from you all; as i am utterly unable to inventany thing (notwithstanding the most curious search of my braine) aptor fit for the purpose, to paragon the meanest of them alreadyrelated. and therefore seeing i must needs sinne in the lawestablished by my selfe; i tender my submission, as worthy ofpunishment, or what amends else you please to enjoyne mee. now, asreturned to my wonted priviledge, i say, that the novell recountedby madame eliza, of the fryar godfather and his gossip agnesia, asalso the sottishnesse of the senese her husband, hath wrought in me(worthy ladies) to such effect; as, forbearing to speake any more ofthese wily prancks, which witty wives exercise on their simplehusbands; i am to tell you a pretty short tale; which, though there ismatter enough in it, not worthy the crediting, yet partly it willbee pleasing to heare.
sometime there lived in sienna two popular men; the one beingnamed tingoccio mini, and the other meucio de tura; men simple, and ofno understanding, both of them dwelling in porta salaia. these two menlived in such familiar conversation together, and expressed suchcordiall affection each to other, as they seldome walked asunder;but (as honest men use to doe) frequented churches and sermons,oftentimes hearing, both what miseries and beatitudes were in theworld to come, according to the merits of their soules that weredeparted out of this life, and found their equall repaiment in theother. the manifold repetition of these matters, made them veryearnestly desirous to know, by what meanes they might have tydingsfrom thence, for their further confirmation. and finding all theirendeavours utterly frustrated, they made a solemne vow and promise(each to other under oath) that hee which first dyed of them two,should returne backe againe (so soone as possibly he could) to theother remaining alive, and tell him such tydings as hee desired toheare.
after the promise was thus faithfully made, and they still keepingcompany, as they were wont to doe: it fortuned, that tingocciobecame gossip to one, named ambrosio anselmino, dwelling incamporegglo, who by his wife, called monna mita, had a sweet andlovely sonne. tingoccio often resorting thither, and consorted withhis companion meucio; the she-gossip, being a woman worthy the loving,faire and comely of her person. tingoccio, notwithstanding thegossipship betweene them, had more then a moneths minde to hisgodchilds mother. meucio also fell sicke of the same disease,because shee seemed fleasing in his eye, and tingoccio gave he nomeane commendations; yet, carefully hey concealed their love tothemselves, but not for one and the same occasion. because tingocciokept it closely from meucio, lest he should hold it disgracefull inhim, to beare amourous affection to his gossip, and thought itunfitting to bee knowne. but meucio had no such meaning, for heeknew well enough that tingoccio loved her, and therefore conceivedin his minde, that if he discovered any such matter to him: he will(quoth he) be jealous of me, and being her gossip (which admitteth hisconference with her when himselfe pleaseth;) he may easily make her todistaste me, and therefore i must rest contented as i am.
their love continuing on still in this kinde, tingoccio prooved sofortunate in the businesse, that having better meanes then hiscompanion, and more prevayring courses, when, where, and how tocourt his mistresse, which seemed to forward him effectually. allwhich meucio plainely perceived, and though it was tedious andwearisome to him, yet hoping to finde some successe at length: hewould not take notice of any thing, as fearing to infringe the amitybetweene him and tingoccio, and so his hope to be quite supplanted.thus the one triumphing in his loves happinesse, and the otherhoping for his felicity to come; a lingering sickenesse seazed ontingoccio, which brought him to so low a condition, as at the lengthhe dyed.
about some three or foure nights after, meucio being fast asleepe inhis bed, the ghoste of tingoccio appeared to him, and called soloude that meucio awaking, demanded who called him? i am thy friendtingoccio, replied the ghoste, who according to my former promisemade, am come again in vision to thee, to tell thee tidings out of thenether world. meucio was a while somewhat amazed: but, recollectinghis more manly spirits together, boldly he said. my brother andfriend, thou art heartily welcome: but i thought thou hadst beeneutterly lost. those things (quoth tingoccio) are lost, which cannot berecovered againe, and if i were lost, how could i then be heere withthee? alas tingoccio, replyed meucio, my meaning is not so: but iwould be resolved, whether thou art among the damned soules, in thepainefull fire of hell torments, or no? no (quoth tingoccio) i amnot sent thither, but for divers sinnes by mee committed i am tosuffer very great and grievous paines. then meucio demaundedparticularly, the punishments inflicted there, for the severall sinnescommitted heere: wherein tingoccio fully resolved him. and uponfurther question, what hee would have to be done for him here, madeanswere, that meucio should cause masses, prayers and almes-deeds tobe performed for him, which (he said) were very helpefull to thesoules abiding there, and meucio promised to see them done.
as the ghost was offering to depart, meucio remembred tingoccioesgossip monna mita, and raysing himselfe higher upon his pillowe, said.my memorie informeth me friend tingoccio, your kinde gossip monnamita, with whom (when you remained in this life) i knew you to be veryfamiliar: let me intreat you then to tell me, what punishment isinflicted on you there, for that wanton sinne committed heere? ohbrother meucio, answered tingoccio, so soone as my soule was landedthere, one came immediately to me, who seemed to know all mineoffences readily by heart, and forthwith commanded, that i shoulddepart thence into a certaine place, where i must weepe for mysinnes in very grievous paines. there i found more of my companions,condemned to the same punishment as i was, and being among them, icalled to minde some wanton dalliances, which had passed betweene mygossip and me, and expecting therefore farre greater afflictions, thenas yet i felt (although i was in a huge fire, and exceedingly hot) yetwith conceite of feare, i quaked and trembled wondrously.
one of my other consorts being by me, and perceiving in what anextreame agony i was; presently said unto me. my friend, what hastthou done more, then any of us here condemned with thee, that thoutremblest and quakest, being in so hot a fire? oh my friend (quothi) i am in feare of a greater judgement then this, for a grievousoffence by mee heretofore committed while i lived. then heedemaunded of mee what offence it was, whereto thus i answered. itwas my chance in the other world, to be godfather at a childschristning, and afterward i grew so affectionate to the childs mother,as (indeed) i kissed her twice or thrise. my companyon laughing atme in mocking manner, replyed thus. goe like an asse as thou art,and be no more afraid hereafter, for here is no punishmentinflicted, in any kinde whatsoever, for such offences of frailtycommitted, especially with gossips, as i my selfe can witnesse.
now day drew on, and the cockes began to crow, a dreadfull hearingto walking spirits, when tingoccio said to meucio. farewell myfriendly companion, for i may tarry no longer with thee, and instantlyhee vanished away. meucio having heard this confession of hisfriend, and verily beleeving it for a truth, that no punishment was tobe inflicted in the future world, for offences of frailty in thislife, and chiefly with gossips: began to condemne his owne folly,having bin a gossip to many wives, yet modesty restrained him fromsuch familiar offending. and therefore being sorry for this grosseignorance, hee made a vowe to be wiser hereafter. and if fryar reynardhad been acquainted with this kind of shrift (as doubtlesse he was,though his gossip agnesia knew it not) he needed no suchsyllogismes, as he put in practise, when he converted her to hislustfull knavery, in the comparison of kinred by him moved, concerningher husband, the childe and himselfe. but, these are the best fruitsof such fryerly confessions, to compasse the issue of their inordinateappetites; yet clouded with the cloake of religion, which hath beenethe overthrow of too many.
by this time the gentle blast of zephirus began to blow, because thesunne grew neere his setting, wherewith the king concluded his novell,and none remaining more to be thus imployed: taking the crowne fromoff his owne head, he placed it on madame laurettaes, saying,madame, i crowne you with your owne crowne, as queene of ourcompany. you shall henceforth command as lady and mistresse, in suchoccasions as shall be to your liking, and for the contentment of usall; with which words he set him downe. and madame lauretta beingnow created queene, shee caused the master of the houshold to beecalled, to whom she gave command, that the tables should be prepared nthe pleasant vally, but at a more convenient houre, then formerlyhad beene, because they might (with better ease) returne backe tothe pallace. then shee tooke order likewise, for all such othernecessary matters, as should bee required in the time of f regiment:and then turning her selfe to the whole company, she began in thismanner.
it was the will of dioneus yesternight, that our discourses for thisday, should concerne the deceits of wives to their husbands. andwere it not to avoyde taxation, of a spleenitive desire to berevenged, like the dog being bitten, biteth againe: i could commandour to morrows conference, to touch mens treacheries towards theirwives. but because i am free from any such fiery humor, let it be yourgenerall consideration, to speake of such queint beguylings, as haveheretofore past, either of the woman to the man, the man to the woman,or of one man to another: and i am of opinion, that they will yeeld usno lesse delight, then those related (this day) have done. when shehad thus spoken, she rose; granting them all liberty, to goerecreate themselves untill supper time.
the ladies being thus at their owne disposing, some of them baredtheir legges and feete, to wash them in the coole current. others, notso minded, walked on the greene grasse, and under the goodly spread:trees. dioneus and madame fiammetta, they sate singing together, thelove-warre between arcit and palemon. and thus with diversity ofdisports, in choice delight and much contentment, all were imployed,till supper drew neere. when the houre re come, and the tables coveredby the ponds side: we need not question their dyet and dainties,infinite birds sweetly singing about them, as no musicke in theworld could be more pleasing; beside calme windes, fanning their facesfrom the neighbouring hilles (free from flyes, or the least annoyance)made a delicate addition to their pleasure.
no sooner were the tables withdrawne, and all risen: but they fetchta few turnings about the vally, because the sunne was not (as yet)quite set. then in the coole evening, according to the queenesappointment: in a soft and gentle pace, they walked homeward: devisingon a thousand occasions, as well those which the dayes discourseshad yeelded, as others of their owne inventing beside. it was almostdarke night, before they arrived at the pallace; where, with varietyof choice wines, and abounding plenty of rare banquetting, they outwore the little toile and wearinesse, which the long walke had chargedthem withall. afterward, according to their wonted order, theinstruments being brought and played on, they fell to dancing aboutthe faire fountaine; tindaro intruding (now and then) the sound of hisbagpipe, to make the musicke seeme more melodious. but in the end, thequeene commanded madame philomena to sing; whereupon the instrumentsbeing tuned fit for the purpose, thus she began.
the song
the chorus sung by the whole company
wearisome is my life to me,
because i cannot once againe returne;
unto the place which made me first to mourne.
nothing i know, yet feele a powerfull fire,
burning within my brest,
through deepe desire;
to be once more where first i felt unrest,
which cannot be exprest.
o my sole good! o my best happinesse!
why am i thus restrainde?
is there no comfort in this wretchednesse?
then let me live content, to be thus painde.
wearisome is my life to me, etc,
i cannot tell what was that rare delight,
which first enflamde my soule,
and gave command in spight,
that i should find no ease by day or night,
but still live in controule.
i see, i heare, and feele a kinde of blisse,
yet find no forme at all:
other in their desire, feele blessednesse,
but i have none, nor thinke i ever shall.
wearisome is my life to me, etc.
tell me, if i may hope in following dayes,
to have but one poore sight,
of those bright sunny rayes,
dazeling my sence, did overecome me quite,
bequeath'd to wandring wayes.
if i be poasted off, and may not prove,
to have the smallest grace:
or but to know, that this proceeds from love,
why should i live despisde in every place?
wearisome is my life to me, etc.
me thinkes milde favour whispers in mine eare,
and bids me not despaire;
there will a time appeare
to quell and quite confound consuming care,
and joy surmount proud feare.
in hope that gracious time will come at length,
to cheare my long dismay:
my spirits reassume your former strength,
and never dread to see that joyfull day.
wearisome is my life to me,
because i cannot once againe returne;
unto the place, which made me first to mourne.
this song gave occasion to the whole company, to imagine, thatsome new and pleasing apprehension of love, constrained madamephilomena to sing in this manner. and because (by the discoursethereof) it plainely appeared, that shee had felt more then sheesaw, shee was so much the more happy, and the like was wished by allthe rest. wherefore, after the song was ended; the queeneremembring, that the next day following was friday, turning herselfe graciously to them all, thus she spake.
you know noble ladies, and you likewise most noble gentlemen, thatto morrow is the day consecrated to the passion of our blessed lordand saviour, which (if you have not forgotten it, as easily youcannot) we devoutly celebrated, madame neiphila being then queene,ceasing from all our pleasant discoursing, as we did the like on thesaturday following, sanctifiing the sacred sabboth, in due regard ofit selfe. wherefore, being desirous to imitate precedent good example,which in worthy manner shee began to us all: i hold it very decent andnecessary, that we should abstaine to morrow, and the day ensuing,from recounting any of our pleasant novels, reducing to ourmemories, what was done (as on those dayes) for the salvation of oursoules. this holy and religious motion made by the queene, wascommendably allowed by all the assembly, and therefore, humblytaking their leave of her, and an indifferent part of the nightbeing already spent; severally they betooke themselves to theirchambers.
the induction to the eight day
whereon all the discourses, passe under the rule and
government, of the honourable ladie lauretta
earely on the sonday morning, aurora shewing her selfe bright andlovely; the sunnes golden beames beganne to appeare, on the toppesof the neere adjoyning mountaines; so, that hearbes, plants, trees,and all things else, were verie evidently to be discerned.
when midday, and the heate thereof was well over-past, so that theaire seemed mild and temperate: according as the queene had commanded;they were all seated againe about the fountaine, with intent toprosecute their former pastime. and then madame neiphila, by thecharge imposed on her, as first speaker for this day, beganne asfolloweth.
the eight day, the first novell
wherein is declared, that such women as will make sale of their
honestie, are sometimes over-reached in their payment,
and justly served as they should be
gulfardo made a match or wager, with the wife of gasparuolo, for theobtaining of her amorous favour, in regard of a summe of money firstto be given her. the money hee borrowed of her husband, and gave it inpayment to her, as in case of discharging him from her husbandsdebt. after his returne home from geneway, hee told him in thepresence of his wife, how he had payde the whole summe to her, withcharge of delivering it to her husband, which she confessed to betrue, albeit greatly against her will.
seeing is my fortune, gracious ladies, that i must give beginning tothis dayes discoursing, by some such novel which i thinke expedient;as duty bindeth me, i am therewith well contented. and because thedeceits of women to men, have beene at large and liberally related;i will tell you a subtile tricke of a man to a woman. not that i blamehim for the deede, or thinke the deceyte not well fitted to the woman:but i speake it in a contrarie nature, as commending the man, andcondemning the woman very justly, as also to shew, how men can as wellbeguile those crafty companions, which least beleeve any suchcunning in them, as they that stand most on their artificiall skill.
howbeit, to speake more properly, the matter by me to be reported,deserveth not the reproachfull title of deceite, but rather of arecompence duly returned: because women ought to be chaste and honest,and to preserve their honour as their lives, without yeelding to thecontamination thereof, for any occasion whatsoever. and yetneverthelesse (in regard of our frailty) many times we proove not soconstant as we should be: yet i am of opinion, that she whichselleth her honestie for money, deserveth justly to be burned. whereason the contrary, she that falleth into the offence, onely throughintire affection (the powerfull lawes of love beeing above allresistance) in equity meriteth pardon, especially of a judge notover-rigorous: as not long since wee heard from philostratus, inrevealing what hapned to madam phillippa de prato, upon thedangerous edict.
understand then, my most worthy auditors, that there livedsometime in millaine an almaigne soldiour, named gulfardo, ofcommendable carriage in his person, and very faithfull to such as heserved, a matter not common among the almaignes. and because he madejust repayment, to every one which lent him monies; he grew to suchespeciall credit, and was so familiar with the very best marchants; as(manie times) he could not be so ready to borrow, as they were willingalwaies to lend him. he thus continuing in the cittie of millaine,fastened his affection on a verie beautifull gentlewoman, namedmistresse ambrosia, wife unto a rich merchant, who was calledsignior gasparuolo sagastraccio, who had good knowledge of him, andrespectively used him. loving this gentlewoman with greatdiscretion, without the least apprehension of her husband: he sentupon a day to entreate conference with her, for enjoying thefruition of her love, and she should find him ready to fulfillwhatsoever she pleased to command him, as, at any time he would makegood his promise.
the gentlewoman, after divers of these private solicitings,resolutely answered, that she was as ready to fulfill the request ofgulfardo, provided, that two especiall considerations might ensuethereon. first, the faithfull concealing thereof from any personliving. next, because she knew him to be rich, and she had occasion touse two hundred crowns, about businesse of important consequence: heshould freely bestow so many on her, and (ever after) she was to becommanded by him. gulfardo perceiving the covetousnesse of this woman,who (notwithstanding his doting affection) he thought to be intirelyhonest to her husband: became so deepely offended at her vile answere,that his fervent love converted into as earnest loathing her;determining constantlie to deceive her, and to make her avaritiousmotion, the only means wherby to effect it.
he sent her word, that he was willing to performe her request, orany farre greater matter for her: in which respect, he onely desiredfor to know, when she would be pleased to have him come see her, andto receive the money of him? no creature hee acquainted with hissetled purpose, but onely a deere friend and kinde companion, whoalwayes used to keepe him company, in the neerest occasions thatconcerned him. the gentlewoman, or rather most disloyall wife, upponthis answer sent her, was extraordinarily jocond and contented,returning him a secret letter, wherein she signified: thatgasparuolo her husband, had important affaires which called him togeneway: but he should understand of his departure, and then (withsafety) he might come see her, as also his bringing of the crownes.
in the meane while, gulfardo having determined what he would do,watched a convenient time, when he went unto gasparuolo, and sayde:sir, i have some businesse of maine importance, and shall neede to usebut two hundred crownes onely: i desire you to lend me so manycrownes, upon such profite as you were wont to take of mee, at othertimes when i have made use of you, and i shall not faile you at myday.
gasparuolo was well contented with the motion, and made no moreadoe, but counted downe the crownes: departing thence (within a fewdayes after) for geneway, according to his wives former message; shegiving gulfardo also intelligence of his absence, that now (withsafety) hee might come see her, and bring the two hundred crownes withhim.
gulfardo, taking his friend in his company, went to visitmistresse ambrosia, whom he found in expectation of his arrivall,and the first thing he did, he counted downe the two hundredcrownes; and delivering them to her in the presence of his friend,saide: mistresse ambrosia, receive these two hundred crownes, whichi desire you to pay unto your husband on my behalfe, when he isreturned from geneway. ambrosia, receyved the two hundred crownes, notregarding wherefore gulfardo used these words: because shee verilybeleeved, that hee spake in such manner, because his friend shouldtake no notice, of his giving them to her, upon any covenant passedbetweene them; whereuppon, she sayde. sir, i will pay them to myhusband for you; and cause him to give you a sufficient discharge: butfirst i will count them over my selfe, to see whether the summe bejust, or no. and having drawne them over upon the table, the summecontaining truly two hundred crownes (wherewith she was most highlycontented) she lockt them safe uppe in her cuppeboord, andgulfardoes friend being gone (as formerly it was compacted betweenethem) shee came to converse more familiarly with him, havingprovided a banquet for him. what passed between them afterward, boththen, and oftentimes beside, before her husbande returned home, is amatter out of y element, and rather requires my ignoance thenknowledge.
when gasparuolo was come from genway, gulfardo observing aconvenient time, when he was sitting at the doore with his wife; tookehis friend with him, and comming to gasparuolo, said. worthy sir,the two hundred crownes which you lent me before your journy togeneway, in regard they could not serve my turne, to compasse thebusinesse for which i borrowed them: within a day or two after, in thepresence of this gentle man my friend, i made repayment of them toyour wife, and therefore i pray you crosse me out of your booke.
gasparuolo turning to his wife, demanded; whether it was so, orno? she beholding the witnesse standing by, who was also present ather receyving them: durst not make deniall, but thus answered. indeedehusband, i received two hundred crownes of the gentleman, and neverremembred, to acquaint you therewith since your comming home: buthereafter i will be made no more your receiver, except i carried aquicker memory. then saide gasparuolo: signior gulfardo, i finde youalwaies a most honest gentleman, and will be readie at any time, todoe you the like, or a farre greater kindnesse; depart at yourpleasure, and feare not the crossing of my booke. so gulfardo wentaway merily contented, and ambrosia was served as she justlymerited; she paying the price of her owne leudnesse to her husband,which she had a more covetous intent to keepe, questionlesse, notcaring how many like lustfull matches shee coulde make, to be soliberally rewarded, if this had succeeded to her minde: whereas heshewed himselfe wise and discreete, in paying nothing for hispleasure, and requiting a covetous queane in her kinde.
the eight day, the second novell
approving, that no promise is to be kept with such women as will
make sale of their honesty for coyne. a warning also for men,
not to suffer priests to be over familiar with
their wives
a lustie youthfull priest of varlungo, fell in love with a prettywoman, named monna belcolore. to compasse his amorous desire, heelefte his cloake (as a pledge of further payment) with her. by asubtile sleight afterward, he made meanes to borrow a morter of her,which when hee sent home againe in the presence of her husband; hedemaunded to have his cloake sent him, as having left it in pawnefor the morter. to pacifie her husband, offended that shee did notlend the priest the morter without a pawne: she sent him backe hiscloake againe, albeit greatly against her will.
both the gentlemen and ladies gave equall commendations, ofgulfardoes queint beguiling the millaine gentle-woman ambrosia,andwishing all other (of her minde) might alwaies be so served. thenthe queene, smiling on pamphilus, commaunded him to follow next:whereupon, thus he began.
i can tell you (faire ladies) a short novell, against such as arecontinually offensive to us, yet we being no way able to offend him;at least, in the same manner as they do injurie us. and for yourbetter understanding what and who they be, they are our lusty priests,who advance their standard, and make their publike predicationsagainst our wives, winning such advantage over them, that they canpardon them both of the sinne and punnishment, whensoever they areonce subjected unto theyr perswasions, even as if they brought thesoldane bound and captived, from alexandria to avignon. whichimperious power, we (poore soules) cannot exercise on them,considering, we have neither heart nor courage, to do our devoire injust revenge on their mothers, sisters, daughters, and friends, withthe like spirit as they rise in armes against our wives. andtherefore, i meane to tell you a tale of a country mans wife, moreto make you laugh at the conclusion thereof; then for anysingularity of words or matter: yet this benefite you may gainethereby, of an apparant proofe, that such sinamon, amorous andperswading priests, are not alwayes to be credited on their words orpromises.
let me then tell you, that at varlungo, which you know to bee notfarre distant hence, there dwelt an youthfull priest, lustie, gallant,and proper of person (especially for womens service) commonly calledby the name of sweet sir simon. now, albeit he was a man of slenderreading, yet notwithstanding, he had store of latine sentences byheart; some true, but twice so many maimed and false, saint-likeshewes, holy speeches, and ghostly admonitions, which hee would preachunder an oake in the fields, when he had congregated hisparishioners together. when women lay in childebed, hee was theirdaily comfortable visitant, and would man them from their houses, whenthey had any occasion to walke abroad: carrying alwaies a bottle ofholy water about him, wherewith he would sprinkle them by the way,peeces of halowed candles, and chrisome cakes, which pleased womenextraordinarily, and all the country affoorded not such anotherfrolicke priest, as this our nimble and active sweet sir simon.
among many other of his feminine parishioners, all of them beinghansome and comely women: yet there was one more pleasing in hiswanton eye, then any of the rest, named monna belcolore, and wife to aplaine mecanicke man, called bentivegna del mazzo. and, to speakeuprightly, few countrey villages yeelded a woman, more fresh andlovely of complexion, although not admirable for beauty, yet sweetesir simon thoght her a saint, and faine would be offering at hershrine. divers prety pleasing qualities she had, as sounding thecymball, playing artificially on the timbrill, and singing theretoas it had beene a nightingale, dancing also so dexteriously, ashappy was the man that could dance in her company. all which soenflamed sweet sir simon, that he lost his wonted sprightly behaviour,walked sullen, sad and melancholly, as if he had melted all hismettall, because hee could hardly have a sight of her. but on thesonday morning, when hee heard or knew that she was in the church, heewould tickle it with a kyrie and a sancsingular skill in singing, whenit had beene as good to heare an asse bray. whereas on the contrary,when she came not to church masse, and all else were quicklie shakenuppe, as if his devotion waited onely on her presence. yet he was socunning in the carriage of his amorous businesse, both for her crediteand his owne; as bentivegna her husband could not perceive it, orany neighbor so much as suspect it.
but, to compaise more familiar acquaintance with belcolore, hee senther sundry gifts and presents, day by day, as sometime a bunch ofdainty greene garlicke, whereof he had plenty growing in his garden,which he manured with his owne hands, and better then all the countreyyeelded; otherwhiles a small basket of pease or benes, and onyons orscallions, as the season served. but when he could come in place whereshe was; then he darted amourous wincks and glances at her, withbecks, nods, and blushes, loves private ambassadours, which shee(being but countrey-bred) seeming by outward appearance, not to see,retorted disdainefully, and forthwith would absent her selfe, sothat sweet sir simon laboured still in vaine, and could not compassewhat he coveted.
it came to passe within a while after, that on a time, (about highnoone) sir simon being walking abroad, chanced to meete withbentivegna, driving an asse before him, laden with divers commodities,and demaunding of him, whither he went, bentivegna, thus answered.in troth sir simon, i am going to the city, about some especiallbusinesse of mine owne, and i carry these things to signiorbonacorci da ginestreto, because he should helpe me before thejudge, when i shall be called in question concerning my patrimony. sirsimon looking merily on him, said. thou doest well bentivegna, to makea friend sure before thou need him; goe, take my blessing with thee,and returne againe with good successe. but if thou meet with laguccio,or naldino, forget not to tell them, that they must bring me myshooe-tyes before sunday. bentivegna said, hee would discharge hiserrand, and so parted from him, driving his asse on towards florence.
now began sir simon to shrug, and scratch his head, thinking this tobe a fit convenient time, for him to goe visite belcolore, and to maketriall of his fortune: wherefore, setting aside all other businesse,he stayed no where till he came to the house, whereinto beingentred, he saide: all happinesse be to them that dwell heere.belcolore being then above in the chamber, when she heard histongue, replyed. sweet sir simon! you are heartely welcome, whetherare you walking, if the question may bee demaunded? beleeve medainty ducke, answered sir simon, i am come to sit a while withthee, because i met thy husband going to the citie. by this time,belcolore was descended downe the stayres, and having once againegiven welcome to sir simon, she sate downe by him, cleansing ofcolewort seeds from such other course chaffe, which her husband hadprepared before his departure.
sir simon hugging her in his armes, and fetching a vehement sigh,said. my belcolore, how long shall i pine and languish for thy love?how now sir simon? answered she, is this behaviour fitting for an holyman? holy-men belcolore, (quoth sir simon) are made of the same matteras others be, they have the same affections, and therefore subjectto their infirmities. santa maria, answered belcolore, dare priestsdoe such things as you talke of? yes belcolore (quoth he) and muchbetter then other men can, because they are made for the very bestbusinesse, in which regard they are restrained from marriage. true(quoth belcolore) but much more from medling with other mens wives.touch not that text belcolore, replyed sir simon, it is somewhat aboveyour capacity: talke of that i come for, namely thy love, my ducke,and my dove, sir simon is thine, i pray thee be mine.
belcolore observing his smirking behaviour, his proper person,pretty talke, and queint insinuating; felt a motion to female frailty,which yet she would withstand so long as she could, and not beover-hasty in her yeelding. sir simon promiseth her a new paire ofshoes, garters, ribbands, girdles, or what else she would request. sirsimon (quoth she) all these things which you talke of, are fit forwomen: but if your love to mee be such as you make choice of,fulfill what i will motion to you, and then (perhaps) i shall tell youmore. sir simons heate made him hasty to promise whatsoever shewould desire; whereupon, thus shee replyed. on saturday, said she, imust goe to florence, to carry home such yarne as was sent me tospinne, and to amend my spinning wheele: if you will lend mee tenflorines, wherewith i know you are alwayes furnished, i shallredeeme from the usurer my best peticote, and my wedding gowne (bothwell neere lost for lacke of repaiment) without which i cannot beseene at church, or in any other good place else, and then afterwardother matters may be accomplished.
alas sweete belcolore answered sir simon, i never beare any such sumabout me, for men of our profession, doe seldome carry any money atall: but beleeve me on my word, before saturday come, i will not faileto bring them hither. oh sir (quoth belcolore) you men are quickepromisers, but slow performers. doe you thinke to use me, as poorebillezza was, who trusted to as faire words, and found her selfedeceived? now sir simon, her example in being made scandall to theworld, is a sufficient warning for me: if you be not so provided,goe and make use of your friend, for i am not otherwise to be moved.nay belcolore (quoth he) i hope you will not serve me so, but myword shall be of better worth with you. consider the conveniency oftime, wee being so privately here alone: whereas at my returninghither againe, some hinderance may thwart me, and the like opportunitybe never obtained. sir, she) you have heard my resolution; if you willfetche the florines, doe; otherwise, walke about your businesse, for iam a woman of my word.
sir simon perceiving, that she would not trust him upon barewords, nor any thing was to be done, without salvum me fac, whereashis meaning was sine custodia; thus answered. well belcolove, seeingyou dare not credit my bringing the tenne florines, according to mypromised day: i will leave you a good pawne, my very best cloake,lyned quite thorough with rich silke, and made up in the choysestmanner.
belcolore looking on the cloake, said. how much may this cloakebee worth? how much? quoth sir simon, upon my word belcolore, it is ofa right fine flanders serdge, and not above eight dayes since, ibought it thus (ready made) of lotto the fripperer, and payed for itsixe and twenty florines, a pledge then sufficient for your ten. is itpossible, said shee, that it should cost so much? well, sir simon,deliver it me first, i will lay it up safe for you against saturday,when if you fetch it not; i will redeeme mine owne things with it, andleave you to release it your selfe.
the cloake is laid up by belcolore, and sir simon so forward inhis affection; that (in briefe) he enjoyed what hee came for; anddeparted afterward in his light tripping cassocke, but yet thorowby-lanes, and no much frequented places, smelling on a nosegay, asif hee had beene at some wedding in the countrey, and went thuslightly without his cloake, for his better ease. as commonly afteractions of evill, repentance knocketh at the doore of conscience,and urgeth a guilty remembrance, with some sence of sorrow: so wasit now with sweet sir simon, who survayin over all his vailes ofoffering candles, the validity of his yearely benefits, and allcomming nothing neere the summe of (scarce halfe) sixe and twentyflorines; he began to repent his deed of darkenesse, although it wasacted in the day-time, and considered with himselfe, by what honest(yet unsuspected meanes) hee might recover his cloake againe, beforeit went to the broaker, in redemption of belcolores pawnedapparrell, and yet to send her no florines neither.
having a cunning reaching wit, especially in matters for his owneadvantage, and pretending to have a dinner at his lodging, for a fewof some invited friends: he made use of a neighbours boy, sendinghim to the house of belcolore, with request of lending him her stonemorter, to make greenesawce in for his guests, because hee had meaterequired such sawce. belcolore suspecting no treachery, sent him thestone morter with the pestell, and about dinner time, when he knewbentivegna to bee at home with his wife, by a spye which was set forthe purpose; hee called the clearke (usually attending on him) andsaid. take this morter and pestell, beare them home to belcolore,and tell her: sir simon sends them home with thankes, they havingsufficiently served his turne, and desire her likewise, to send memy cloake, which the boy left as a pledge for better remembrance,and because she would not lend it without a pawne.
the clearke comming to the house of belcolore, found her sittingat dinner with her husband, and delivering her the pestell and morter,performed the rest of sir simons message. belcolore hearing the cloakedemaunded, stept up to make answere: but bentivegna, seeming (by hislookes) to be much offended, roughly replyed. why how now wife? is notsir simon our especiall friend, and cannot he be pleasured without apawne? i protest upon my word, i could find in my heart to smitethee for it. rise quickely thou wert best, and send him backe hiscloake; with this warning hereafter, that whatsoever he will have,be it your poore asse, or any thing else being ours, let him haveit: and tell him (master clearke) he may command it. belcolore rosegrumbling from the table, and fetching the cloake forth of thechest, which stood neere at hand in the same roome; shee deliveredit to the clearke, saying. tell sir simon from me, and boldly sayyou heard me speake it: that i make a vow to my selfe, he shallnever make use of my morter hereafter, to beat any more of hissawcinesse in, let my husband say whatsoever he will, i speake theword, and will performe it.
away went the clearke home with the cloake, and told sir simonwhat she had said, whereto he replyed. if i must make use of hermorter no more; i will not trust her with the keeping of my cloake,for feare it goe to gage indeed.
bentivegna was a little displeased at his wives words, because heethought she spake but in jest; albeit belcolore was so angry withsir simon, that she would not speake to him till vintage timefollowing. but then sir simon, what by sharpe threatenings, of hersoule to be in danger of hell fire, continuing so long in hatred ofa holy priest, which words did not a little terrifie her; besidesdaily presents to her, of sweet new wines, roasted chesse-nuts, figgesand almonds: all unkindnesse became converted to former familiarity;the garments were redeemed: he gave her sonnets which she wouldsweetly sing to her cimbale, and further friendship increased betweeneher and sweet sir simon.
the eight day, the third novell
justly reprehending the simplicity of such men, as are too much
addicted to credulitie, and will give credit to every
thing they heare
calandrino, bruno, and buffalmaco, all of them being painters byprofession, travelled to the plaine of mugnone, to finde theprecious stone called helitropium. calandrino no perswaded himselfe tohave found it; returned home to his house heavily loaden withstones. his wife rebuking him for his absence, hee groweth into anger,and shrewdly beateth her. afterward, when the case is debated amonghis other friends bruno and buffalmaco, all is found to be meerefoolery.
pamphilus having ended his novell, whereat the ladies laughedexceedingly, so that very hardly they could give over. the queene gavecharge to madame eliza, that shee should next succeed in order;when, being scarcely able to refraine from smyling, thus she began.
i know not (gracious ladies) whether i can move you to as heartylaughter, with a briefe novell of mine owne, as pamphilus lately didwith his: yet i dare assure you, that it is both true and pleasant,and i will relate it in the best manner i can.
in our owne citie, which evermore hath contained all sorts ofpeople, not long since there dwelt, a painter, named calandrino, asimple man; yet as much adicted to matters of novelty, as any manwhatsoever could be. the most part of his time, he spent in thecompany of two other painters, the one called bruno, and the otherbuffalmaco, men of very recreative spirits, and of indifferent goodcapacity, often resorting to the said calandrino, because they tookedelight in his honest simplicity, and pleasant order of behaviour.at the same time likewise, there dwelt in florence, a yong gentlemanof singular disposition, to every generous and witty conceite, asthe world did not yeeld a more pleasant companion, he being named masodel saggio, who having heard somwhat of calandrinos sillinesse:determined to jest with him in merry manner, and to suggest hislonging humors after novelties, with some conceit of extraordinarynature.
he happening (on a day) to meete him in the church of saint john,and seeing him seriously busied, in beholding the rare pictures, andthe curious carved tabernacle, which (not long before) was placed onthe. high altar in the said church: considered with himselfe, thathe had now fit place and opportunity, to effect what hee had long timedesired. and having imparted his minde to a very intimate friend,how he intended to deale with simple calandrino: they went both veryneere him, where he sate all alone, and making shew as if they saw himnot; began to consult between themselves, concerning the rareproperties of precious stones; whereof maso discoursed as exactly,as he had beene a most skilfull lapidarie; to which conference oftheirs, calandrino lent an attentive eare, in regard it was matterof singular rarity.
soone after, calandrino started up, and perceiving by their loudespeaking, that they talked of nothing which required secretcounsell: he went into their company (the onely thing which masodesired) and holding on still the former argument; calandrino wouldneeds request to know, in what place these precious stones were tobe found, which had such excellent vertues in them? maso made answere,that the most of them were to be had in berlinzona, neere to thecity of bascha, which was in the territory of a countrey, calledbengodi, where the vines were bound about with sawcidges, a goosewas sold for a penny, and the goslings freely given in to boote. therewas also an high mountaine wholly made of parmezane, grated cheese,whereon dwelt people, who did nothing else but make mocharones andravivolies, boyling them with broth of capons, and afterward hurledthem all about, to whosoever can or will catch them. neere to thismountaine runneth a faire river, the whole streame being pure whitebastard, none such was ever sold for any money, and without one dropof water in it.
now trust me sir, (said calandrino) that is an excellent countrey todwell in: but i pray you tell me sir, what do they with the caponsafter they have boyld them? the baschanes (quoth maso) eate themall. have you sir, said calandrino, at any time beene in thatcountrey? how? answered maso, doe you demaund if have beene there? yesman, above a thousand times, at the least. how farre sir, i pray you(quoth calandrino) is that worthy countrey, from this our city? introth, replyed maso, the miles are hardly to be numbred, for themost part of them, we travell when we are nightly in our beddes, andif a man dreame right; he may be there upon a sudden.
surely sir, said calandrino, it is further hence, then to abruzzi?yes questionlesse, replyed maso; but, to a willing minde, no travellseemeth tedious.
calandrino well noting, that maso delivered all these speeches, witha stedfast countenance, no signe of smyling, or any gesture to urgethe least mislike: he gave such credit to them, as to any matter ofapparent and manifest truth, and upon this assured confidence, hesaid.
beleeve me sir, the journey is over-farre for mee to undertake,but if it were neerer; i could affoord to goe in your company; onelyto see how they make these macherones, and to fill my belly with them.
but now wee are in talke sir, i pray you pardon mee to aske, whetherany such precious stones, as you spake off, are to be found in thatcountrey, or no? yes indeed, replyed maso, there are two kinds of themto be found in those territories, both being of very great vertue. onekind, are gritty stones, of settignano, and of montisca, by vertueof which places, when any mill-stones or grind-stones are to bee made,they knede the sand as they use to doe meale, and so make them of whatbignesse they please. in which respect, they have a common sayingthere: that nature maketh common stones, but montisca mill-stones.such plenty are there of these mill-stones, so slenderly here esteemedamong us, as emeralds are with them, whereof they have wholemountaines, farre greater then our montemorello, which shine mostgloriously at midnight. and how meanly soever we account of theirmill-stones; yet there they drill them, and enchase them in rings,which afterward they send to the great soldane, and have whatsoeverthey will demaund for them.
the other kinde is a most precious stone indeede, which our bestlapidaries call the helitropium, the vertue whereof is so admirable;as whosoever beareth it about him, so long as he keepeth it, it isimpossible for any eye to discerne him, because he walketh meerelyinvisible. o lord sir (quoth calandrino) those stones are of rarevertue indeede: but where else may a man finde that helitropium?whereto maso thus answered: that countrey onely doth not containethe helitropium; for they be many times found upon our plaine ofmugnone. of what bignesse sir (quoth calandrino) is the stone, andwhat coulour? the helitropium, answered maso, is not alwayes of onequality, because some are bigge, and others lesse; but all are ofone coulour, namely blacke.
calandrino committing all these things to respective memory, andpretending to be called thence by some other especiall affaires;departed from maso, concluding resolvedly with himselfe, to finde thisprecious stone, if possibly hee could: yet intending to doe nothing,untill hee had acquainted bruno and buffalmaco therewith, whom heloved dearly: he went in all hast to seeke them; because, (without anylonger trifling the time) they three might bee the first men, thatshould find out this precious stone, spending almost the whole morningbefore they were all three met together. for they were painting at themonastery of the sisters of faenza, where they had very seriousimployment, and followed their businesse diligently: where havingfound them, and saluting them in such kinde manner, as continuallyhe used to doe, thus he began.
loving friends, if you were pleased to follow mine advise, wee threewill quickely be the richest men in florence; because, byinformation from a gentleman (well deserving to be credited) on theplaine of mugnone: there is a precious stone to be found, whichwhosoever carrieth it about him, walketh invisible, and is not to beseene by any one. let us three be the first men to goe and finde it,before any other heare thereof, and goe about it, and assure ourselves that we shall finde it, for i know it (by discription) so sooneas i see it. and when wee have it, who can hinder us from bearing itabout us? then will we goe to the tables of our bankers, or moneychangers, which we see daily charged with plenty of gold and silver,where we may take so much as wee list, for they (nor any) are ableto descrie us. so, (in short time) shall wee all be wealthy, neverneeding to drudge any more, or paint muddy walles, as hitherto we havedone; and, as many of our poore profession are forced to doe.
bruno and buffalmaco hearing this, began to smile, and lookingmerily each on other, they seemed to wonder thereat, and greatlycommended the counsell of calandrino. buffalmaco demaunding how thestone was named. now it fortuned, that calandrino (who had but agrosse and blockish memory) had quite forgot the name of the stone,and therefore said. what neede have wee of the name, when we know, andare assured of the stones vertue? let us make no more adoe, but(setting aside all other businesse) goe seeke where it is to be found.well my friend (answered bruno) you say wee may finde it, but how, andby what meanes?
there are two sorts of them (quoth calandrino) some bigge, otherssmaller, but all carry a blacke colour: therefore (in mine opinion)let us gather all such stones as are blacke, so shall we be sure tofinde it among them, without any further losse of time.
buffalmaco and bruno, liked and allowed the counsell ofcalandrino, which when they had (by severall commendations) givenhim assurance of, bruno saide. i doe not thinke it a convenient timenow, for us to go about so weighty a businesse: for the sun is yetin the highest degree, and striketh such a heate on the plaine ofmugnone, as all the stones are extreamly dryed, and the veryblackest will nowe seeme whitest. but in the morning, after the dew isfalne, and before the sunne shineth forth, every stone retaineth histrue colour. moreover, there be many labourers now working on theplaine, about such businesse as they are severally assigned, whoseeing us in so serious a serch: may imagine what we seeke for, andpartake with us in the same inquisition, by which meanes they maychance to speed before us, and so wee may lose both our trot andamble. wherefore, by my consent, if your opinion jumpe with mine, thisis an enterprize onely to be perfourmed in an early morning, whenthe blacke stones are to be distinguisht from the white, and afestivall day were the best of all other, for then there will benone to discover us.
buffalmaco applauded the advice of bruno, and calandrino did nolesse, concluding all together; that sunday morning (next ensuing)should be the time, and then they all three would go see the stone.but calandrino was verie earnest with them, that they shold notreveale it to any living body, because it was tolde him as anespeciall secret: disclosing further to them, what hee had heardconcerning the countrey of bengodi, maintaining (with solemn oaths andprotestations) that every part thereof was true. uppon this agreement,they parted from calandrino who hardly enjoyed anie rest at all,either by night or day, so greedie he was to bee possessed of thestone. on the sonday morning, hee called up his companions beforebreake of day, and going forth at s. galls port, they stayed not, tillthey came to the plaine of mugnone, where they searched all about tofinde this strange stone.
calandrino went stealing before the other two, and verilie perswadedhimselfe, that he was borne to finde the helitropium, and looking onevery side about him, hee rejected all other stones but the blacke,whereof first he filled his bosome, and afterwards, both hispockets. then he tooke off his large painting apron, which he fastenedwith his girdle in the manner of a sacke, and that he filled full ofstones likewise. yet not so satisfied, he spred abroad his cloake,which being also full of stones, hee bound it up carefully, forfeare of loosing the very least of them. all which buffalmaco andbruno well observing (the day growing on, and hardly they couldreach home by dinner time) according as merrily they had concluded,and pretending not to see calandrino, albeit he was not farre fromthem: what is become of calandrino? saide buffalmaco. bruno gazingstrangely every where about him, as if hee were desirous to finde him,replyed. i saw him not long since, for then he was hard by beforeus; questionlesse, he hath given us the slippe, is privilie gonehome to dinner, and making starke fooles of us, hath lefte us to pickeup blacke stones, upon the parching plaines of mugnone. well (quothbuffalmaco) this is but the tricke of an hollow-hearted friend, andnot such as he protested himselfe to be, to us. could any but wee havebin so sottish, to credit his frivolous perswasions, hoping to findeany stones of such vertue, and here on the fruitlesse plains ofmugnone? no, no, none but we would have beleeved him.
calandrino (who was close by them) hearing these wordes, andseeing the whole manner of their wondering behaviour: becameconstantly perswaded, that hee had not onely found the precious stone;but also had some store of them about him, by reason he was so neereto them, and yet they could not see him, therefore he walked beforethem. now was his joy beyond all compasse of expression, and beingexceedingly proud of so happy an adventure: did not meane to speakeone word to them, but (heavily laden as hee was) to steale homefaire and softly before them, which indeede he did, leaving them tofollow after, if they would. bruno perceiving his intent, said tobuffalmaco: what remaineth now for us to doe? why should not we gohome, as well as hee? and reason too, replyed bruno. it is in vaine totarry any longer heere: but i solemnly protest, calandrino shall nomore make an asse of me: and were i now as neere him, as not longsince i was, i would give him such a remembrance on the heele withthis flint stone, as should sticke by him this moneth, to teach hima lesson for abusing his friends.
hee threw the stone, and hit him shrewdly on the heele therewith;but all was one to calandrino, whatsoever they saide, or did, asthus they still followed after him. and although the blow of the stonewas painfull to him; yet he mended his pace so wel as he was able,in regard of beeing over-loaden with stones, and gave them not oneword all the way, because he tooke himselfe to bee invisible, andutterly unseene of them. buffalmaco taking uppe another flintstone,which was indifferent heavie and sharp, said to bruno. seest thou thisflint? casting it from him, he smote calandrino just in the backetherewith, saying that calandrino had bin so neere as i might have hithim on the backe with the stone. and thus all the way on the plaine ofmugnone, they did nothing else but pelt him with stones, even so farreas the port of s. gall, where they threwe downe what other stones theyhad gathered, meaning not to molest him any more, because they haddone enough already.
there they stept before him unto the port, and acquainted thewarders with the whole matter, who laughing heartily at the jest,the better to upholde it; would seeme not to see calandrino in hispassage by them, but suffered him to go on, sore wearied with hisburthen, and sweating extreamly. without resting himselfe in anyplace, he came home to his house, which was neere to the corner of themilles, fortune being so favourable to him in the course of thismockery, that as he passed along the rivers side, and afterwardthrough part of the city; he was neither met nor seen by any, inregard they were all in their houses at dinner.
calandrino, every minute ready to sinke under his weightieburthen, entred into his owne house, where (by great ill luck) hiswife, being a comely and very honest woman, and named monna trista,was standing aloft on the stayres head. she being somewhat angry forhis so long absence, and seeing him come in grunting and groaning,frowningly said. i thought that the divell would never let thee comehome, all the whole citie have dined, and yet wee must remaine withoutour dinner. when calandrino heard this, and perceived that he wasnot invisible to his wife: full of rage and wroth, hee began to raile,saying. ah thou wicked woman, where art thou? thou hast utterly undoneme: but (as i live) i will pay thee soundly for it. up the staireshe ascended into a small parlour, where when he hadde spred all hisburthen of stones on the floore: he ran to his wife, catching frerby the haire of the head, and throwing her at his feete; giving her somany spurns and cruel blowes, as shee was not able to moove eitherarmes or legges, notwithstanding all her teares, and humblesubmission.
now buffalmaco and bruno, after they had spent an indifferent while,with the warders at the port in laughter; in a faire and gentlepace, they followed calandrino home to his house, and being come tothe doore, they heard the harsh bickering betweene him and his wife,and seeming as if they were but newly arrived, they called out alowdto him. calandrino being in a sweate, stamping and raving still at hiswife: looking forth of the window, entreated them to ascend up to him,which they did, counterfetting greevous displeasure against him. beingcome into the roome, which they saw all covered over with stones,his wife sitting in a corner, all the haire (well-neere) torne off herhead, her face broken and bleeding, and all her body cruelly beaten;on the other side, calandrino standing unbraced and ungirded,strugling and wallowing, like a man quite out of breath: after alittle pausing, bruno thus spake.
why how now calandrino? what may the meaning of this matter be?what, art thou preparing for building, that thou hast provided suchplenty of stones? how sitteth thy poore wife? how hast thou misusedher? are these the behaviours of a wise or honest man? calandrino,over-spent with travalle, and carrying such an huge burthen of stones,as also the toylesome beating of his wife, (but much more impatientand offended, for that high good fortune, which he imagined to havelost:) could not collect his spirits together, to answer them oneready word, wherefore hee sate fretting like a mad man. whereupon,buffalmaco thus began to him. calandrino, if thou be angry with anyother, yet thou shouldest not have made such a mockery of us, asthou hast done: in leaving us (like a couple of coxcombes) to theplaine of mugnone, whether thou leddest us with thee, to seeke aprecious stone called helitropium. and couldst thou steale home, neverbidding us so much as farewell? how can we but take it in very evillpart, that thou shouldest so abuse two honest neighbours? well, assurethy selfe, this is the last time that ever thou shalt serve us so.
calandrino (by this time) being somewhat better come to himselfe,with an humble protestation of courtesie, returned them this answer.alas my good friends, be not you offended, the case is farre otherwisethen you immagine. poore unfortunate man that i am, i found the rareprecious stone that you speake of: and marke me well, if i do not tellyou the truth of all. when you asked one another (the first time) whatwas become of me; i was hard by you: at the most, within thedistance of two yards length; and perceiving that you saw mee not,(being still so neere, and alwaies before you:) i went on, smilingto my selfe, to heare you brabble and rage against me.
so, proceeding on in his discourse, he recounted every accident asit hapned, both what they had saide and did unto him, concerning theseverall blowes, with the two flint-stones, the one hurting himgreevously in the heele, and the other paining him as extreamly in thebacke, with their speeches used then, and his laughter,notwithstanding hee felt the harme of them both, yet beeing proud thathe did so invisibly beguile them. nay more (quoth he) i cannotforbeare to tell you, that when i passed thorow the port, i saw youstanding with the warders; yet, by vertue of that excellent stone,undiscovered of you all. beside, going along the streets, i met manyof my gossips, friends, and familiar acquaintance, such as used daylieto converse with me, and drinking together in every tavern: yet notone of them spake to me, neyther used any courtesie or salutation;which (indeede) i did the more freely forgive them, because theywere not able to see me.
in the end of all when i was come home into mine owne house, thisdivellish and accursed woman, being aloft uppon my stayres head, bymuch misfortune chanced to see me; in regard (as it is not unknowne toyou) that women cause all things to lose their vertue. in whichrespect, i that could have stild my selfe the onely happy man inflorence, am now made most miserable. and therefore did i justly beateher, so long as she was able to stand against mee, and i know noreason to the contrary, why i should not yet teare her in a thousandpeeces: for i may well curse the day of our mariage, to hinder andbereave me of such an invisible blessednesse.
buffalmaco and bruno hearing this, made shew of verie muchmervailing thereat, and many times maintained what calandrino hadsaid; being well neere ready to burst with laughter; considering,how confidently he stood upon it, that he had found the wonderfulstone, and lost it by his wives speaking onely to him. but when theysaw him rise in fury once more, with intent to beat her againe: thenthey stept betweene them; affirming, that the woman had no wayoffended in this case, but rather he himself: who knowing that womencause all things to lose their vertue, had not therefore expreslycommanded her, not to be seene in his presence all that day, untill hehad made full proofe of the stones vertue. and questionles, theconsideration of a matter so availeable and important, was quite takenfrom him, because such an especiall happinesse, should not belong tohim only; but (in part) to his friends, whom he had acquaintedtherewith, drew them to the plaine with him in companie, where theytooke as much paines in serch of the stone, as possibly he did, orcould; and yet (dishonestly) he would deceive them, and beare itaway covetously, for his owne private benefit.
after many other, as wise and wholesome perswasions, which heconstantly credited, because they spake them, they reconciled him tohis wife, and she to him: but not without some difficulty in him;who falling into wonderfull greefe and melancholy, for losse of suchan admirable precious stone, was in danger to have dyed, withinlesse then a month after.
the eight day, the fourth novell
wherein is declared, how love oftentimes is so powerfull in aged
men, and driveth them to such doating, that it
redoundeth to their great disgrace and punishment
the provost belonging to the cathedrall church of fiesola, fell inlove with a gentlewoman, being a widdow, and named piccarda, who hatedhim as much as he loved her. he imagining, that he lay with her: bythe gentlewomans bretheren, and the byshop under whom he served, wastaken in bed with her mayde, an ugly, foule, deformed slut.
ladie eliza having concluded her novell, not without infinitecommendations of the whole company: the queen turning her lookes tomadame aimillia, gave her such an expresse signe, as she must needsfollow next after madame eliza, whereupon she began in this manner.
vertuous ladies, i very well remember (by divers novels formerlyrelated) that sufficient hath beene sayde, concerning priests andreligious persons, and all other carrying shaven crownes, in theirluxurious appetites and desires. but because no one can at any timesay so much, as thereto no more may be added: beside them alreadiespoken of, i wil tel you another concerning the provost of a cathedralchurch, who would needes (in despight of all the world) love agentlewoman whether she would or no: and therefore, in duechastisement both unto his age and folly, she gave him suchentertainment as he justly deserved.
it is not unknowne unto you all, that the cittie of fieosola, themountaine whereof we may very easily hither discerne, hath bene (intimes past) a very great and most ancient city: although at this dayit is wellneere all ruined: yet neverthelesse, it alwaies was, and yetis a byshops see, albeit not of the wealthiest. in the same citie, andno long while since, neere unto the cathedrall church, there dwelt agentlewoman, being a widdow, and commonlie there stiled by the name ofmadame piccarda, whose house and inheritance was but small,wherewith yet she lived very contentedly (having no wandering eye,or wanton desires) and no company but her two brethren, gentlemen ofespeciall honest and gracious disposition.
this gentlewoman, being yet in the flourishing condition of hertime, did ordinarily resort to the cathedrall church in holie zeale,and religious devotion; where the provost of the place, became soenamored of her, as nothing (but the sight of her) yeelded him anycontentment. which fond affection of his, was forwarded with such anaudacious and bold carriage, as hee dared to acquaint her with hislove, requiring her enterchange of affection, and the like opinionof him, as he had of her. true it is, that he was very farre entredinto yeares, but yong and lustie in his own proud conceite,presuming strangely beyond his capacity, and thinking as well of hisabilitie, as the youthfullest gallant in the world could doe.whereas (in verie deede) his person was utterly displeasing, hisbehaviour immodest and scandaious, and his usuall language,savouring of such sensualitie, as, very fewe or none cared for hiscompany. and if any woman seemed respective of him, it was in regardof his outside and profession, and more for feare, then the leastaffection, and alwayes as welcome to them, as the head-ake.
his fond and foolish carriage stil continuing to this gentlewoman;she being wise and vertuously advised, spake thus unto him. holysir, if you love me according as you protest, and manifest by youroutward behaviour: i am the more to thanke you for it, being boundin dutie to love you likewise. but if your love have any harshe orunsavourie taste, which mine is no way able to endure, neyther dareentertaine in anie kinde whatsoever: you must and shall hold meeexcused, because i am made of no such temper. you are my ghostly andspirituall father, an holy priest. moreover, yeares have made youhonorably aged; all which severall weighty considerations, ought toconfirme you in continency and chastity. remember withall (good sir)that i am but a child to you in years, and were i bent to any wantonappetites, you shold justly correct me by fatherly counsell, such asmost beautifieth your sacred profession. beside, i am a widdow, andyou are not ignorant, how requisite a thing honestie is in widdowes.wherefore, pardon mee (holy father:) for, in such manner as you makethe motion: i desire you not to love mee, because i neither can orwill at any time so affect you.
the provoste gaining no other grace at this time, would not sogive over for this first repulse, but pursuing her still withunbeseeming importunity; many private meanes he used to her byletters, tokens, and insinuating ambassages; yea, whensoever shee cameto the church, he never ceased his wearisome solicitings. whereatshe growing greatly offended, and perceyving no likelyhood of hisdesisting; became so tyred with his tedious suite, that she consideredwith her selfe, how she might dispatch him as he deserved, because shesaw no other remedy. yet shee would not attempte anie thing in thiscase, without acquainting her bretheren first therwith. and havingtolde them, how much shee was importuned by the provost, and also whatcourse she meant to take (wherin they both counselled and encouragedher:) within a few daies after, shee went to church as she was wont todo; where so soone as the provost espyed her: forthwith he came toher, and according to his continued course, he fell into his amorouscourting. she looking upon him with a smiling countenance, and walkingaside with him out of any hearing: after he had spent many impertinentspeeches, shee (venting foorth manie a vehement sighe) at lengthreturned him this answer.
reverend father, i have often heard it saide: that there is notany fort or castle, how strongly munited soever it bee; but bycontinuall assayling, at length (of necessity) it must and will besurprized. which comparison, i may full well allude to my selfe.for, you having so long time solicited me, one while with affablelanguage, then againe with tokens and entisements, of suchprevailing power: as have broken the verie barricado of my formerdeliberation, and yeelded mee uppe as your prisoner, to be commandedat your pleasure for now i am onely devoted yours.
well may you (gentle ladies) imagine, that this answere was not alittle welcome to the provost; who, shrugging with conceyte of joy,presently thus replyed. i thanke you madame piccarda, and to tellyou true, i held it almost as that you could stand upon such longresistance, considering, it never so fortuned to mee with anieother. and i have many times saide to my selfe, that if women weremade of silver, they hardly could be worth a pennie, because there canscarsely one be found of so good allay, as to endure the test andessay. but let us breake off this frivolous conference, and resolveupon a conclusion; how, when and where we may safely meete together.worthy sir, answered piccarda, your selfe may appoint the timewhensoever you please, because i have no husband, to whom i shouldrender any account of my absence, or presence: but i am not providedof any place.
a pretty while the provoste stood musing, and at last saide. a placemadame? where can be more privacie, then in your owne house? alassir (quoth she) you know that i have two gentlemen my brethren, whocontinually are with me, and other of their friends beside: my housealso is not great, wherefore it is impossible to be there, exceptyou could be like a dumbe man, without speaking one word, or makingthe very least noyse; beside, to remaine in darkenesse, as if you wereblinde, and who can be able to endure all these? and yet (withoutthese) there is no adventuring, albeit they never come into mychamber: but their lodging is so close to mine, as there cannot anyword be spoken, be it never so low or in whispering manner, but theyheare it very easily. madame said the provoste, for one or two nights,i can make hard shift. why sir (quoth she) the matter onelyremaineth in you, for if you be silent and suffering, as already youhave heard, there is no feare at all of safty. let me alone madame,replyed the provoste, i will be governed by your directions: but, inany case, let us begin this night. with all my heart, saide shee. soappointing him how, and when hee should come; hee parted from her, andshee returned home to her house.
heere i am to tell you, that this gentlewoman had a servant, inthe nature of an old maide, not indued with any well featured face,but instead thereof, she had the ugliest and most counterfeitcountenance, as hardly could be seene a worse. she had a wrie mouth,huge great lippes, foule teeth, great and blacke, a monstrous stinkingbreath, her eyes bleared, and alwayes running, the complexion of herface betweene greene and yellow, as if shee had not spent the summerseason in the citie, but in the parching countrey under a hedge; andbeside all these excellent parts, shee was crooke backt, poult footed,and went like a lame mare in fetters. her name was ciuta, but inregard of her flat nose, lying as low as a beagles, shee was calledciutazza. now, notwithstanding all this deformity in her, yet shehad a singuler opinion of her selfe, as commonly all such foulesluts have: in regard whereof, madame piccarda calling her aside, thusbegan.
ciutazza, if thou wilt doe for me one nights service, i shall bestowon thee a faire new smocke. when ciutazza heard her speake of a newsmocke, instantly she answered. madame, if you please to bestow anew smocke on me, were it to runne thorow the fire for you, or anybusinesse of farre greater danger, you onely have the power to commandme, and i will doe it. i will not (said piccarda) urge thee to anydangerous action, but onely to lodge in my bed this night with aman, and give him courteous entertainement, who shall reward theeliberally for it. but have an especiall care that thou speake notone word, for feare thou shouldst be heard by my brethren, who (asthou knowest) lodge so neere by; doe this, and then demaund thy smockeof me. madame (quoth ciutazza) if it were to lye with sixe men, ratherthen one; if you say the word, it shall be done.
when night was come, the provoste also came according toappointment, even when two brethren were in their lodging, they easilyheard his entrance, as piccarda (being present with them) had informedthem. in went the provoste without any candle, or making the leastnoise to be heard, and being in piccardaes chamber, went to bed:ciutazza tarrying not long from him, but (as her mistresse hadinstructed her) she went to bed likewise, not speaking any word atall, and the provoste, imagining to have her there, whom he sohighly affected, fell to imbracing and kissing ciutazza, who was asforward in the same manner to him, and there for a while i intend toleave them.
when piccarda had performed this hot piece of businesse, shereferred the effecting of the remainder to her brethren, in suchsort as it was compacted betweene them. faire and softly went thetwo brethren forth of their chamber, and going to the market place,fortune was more favourable to them then they could wish, inaccomplishing the issue of their intent. for the heat being somwhattedious, the lord bishop was walking abroad very late, with purpose tovisit the brethren at the widdowes house, because he tooke greatdelight in their company, as being good schollers, and endued withother singular parts beside. meeting with them in the open marketplace, he acquainted them with his determination; whereof they werenot a little joyfull, it jumping so justly with their intent.
being come to the widdowes house, they passed through a smalnether court, where lights stood ready to welcome him thither; andentring into a goodly hall, there was store of good wine andbanquetting, which the bishop accepted in very thankefull manner:and courteous complement being overpassed, one of the brethren, thusspake. my good lord, seeing it hath pleased you to honour our poorewiddowed sisters house with your presence, for which wee shallthanke you while we live: we would intreate one favour more of you,onely but to see a sight which we will shew you. the lord bishop waswell contented with the motion: so the brethren conducting him bythe hand, brought him into their sisters chamber, where the provostewas in bed with ciutazza, both soundly sleeping, but enfolded in hisarmes, as wearied (belike) with their former wantonning, and whereofhis age had but little need.
the courtaines being close drawne about the bed, although the seasonwas exceeding hot, they having lighted torches in their hands; drewopen the curtaines, and shewed the bishop his provoste, close snuggingbetweene the armes of ciutazza. upon a sudden the provoste awaked, andseeing so great a light, as also so many people about him: shame andfeare so daunted him, that hee shrunke downe in the bed, and hid hishead. but the bishop being displeased at a sight so unseemely, madehim to discover his head againe, to see whom he was in bed withall.now the poore provoste perceiving the gentlewomans deceite, and theproper hansome person so sweetly embracing him: it made him soconfounded with shame, as he had not the power to utter one word:but having put on his cloathes by the bishops command, hee sent him(under sufficient guard) to his pallace, to suffer due chastisementfor his sinne committed; and afterward he desired to know, by whatmeanes hee became so favoured of ciutazza, the whole historie whereof,the two brethren related at large to him.
when the bishop had heard all the discourse, highly he commended thewisedome of the gentlewoman, and worthy assistance of her brethren,who contemning to soile their hands in the blood of a priest, rathersought to shame him as hee deserved. the bishop enjoyned him apennance of repentance for forty dayes after, but love and disdainemade him weepe nine and forty: moreover, it was a long while after,before he durst be seene abroad. but when he came to walke thestreets, the boyes would point their fingers at him, saying. beholdthe provoste that lay with ciutazza: which was such a wearisome lifeto him, that he became (well neere) distracted in his wits. in thismanner the honest gentlewoman discharged her dutie, and rid herselfe of the provosts importunity: ciutazza had a merry night of it,and a new smocke also for her labour.
the eight day, the fift novell
giving admonition, that for the managing of publique affaires, no
other persons are or ought to be appointed, but such as be honest,
and meet to sit on the seate of authority
three pleasant companions, plaide a merry pranke with a judge(belonging to the marquesate of ancona) at florence, at such time ashe sate on the bench, and hearing criminall causes.
no sooner had madam aemillia finished her novell, wherin, theexcellent wisdome of piccarda, for so worthily punishing the luxuriousold provoste, had generall commendations of the whole assembly: butthe queene, looking on philostratus, said. i command you next tosupply the place: whereto he made answere, that hee was both ready andwilling, and then thus began. honourable ladies, the merrygentleman, so lately remembred by madame eliza, being named maso delsaggio; causeth me to passe over an intended tale, which i hadresolved on when it came to my turne: to report another concerninghim, and two men more, his friendly companions. which although itmay appeare to you somewhat unpleasing, in regard of a little grosseand unmannerly behaviour: yet it will move merriment without anyoffence, and that is the maine reason why i relate it.
it is not unknowne to you, partly by intelligence from ourreverend predecessours, as also some understanding of your owne,that many time have resorted to our city of florence, potestates andofficers, belonging to the marquesate of anconia; who commonly weremen of lowe spirit, and their lives so wretched and penurious, as theyrather deserved to be tearmed misers, then men. and in regard ofthis their naturall covetousnesse and misery, the judges would bringalso in their company, such scribes or notaries, as being paraleldewith their masters: they all seemed like swaines come from the plough,or bred up in some coblers quality, rather then schollers, or studentsof law.
at one time (above all the rest) among other potestates andjudges, there came an especiall man, as pickt out of purpose, whowas named messer niccolao da san lepidio, who (at the first beholding)looked rather like a tinker, then any officer in authority. thishansome man (among the rest) was deputed to heare criminall causes.and, as often it happeneth, that citizens, although no businesseinviteth them to judiciall courts, yet they still resort thither,sometimes accidentally: so it fortuned, that maso times del saggio,being one morning in search of an especiall friend, went to thecourt-house, and being there, observed in what manner messerniccolao was seated; who looking like some strange fowle, latelycome forth of a farre countrey; he began to survay him the moreseriously, even from the head to the foot, as we use to say.and albeit he saw his gowne furred with miniver, as also the hoodabout his necke, a penne and inkehorne hanging at his girdle, andone skirt of his garment longer then the other, with more misshapensights about him, farre unfitting for a man of so civill profession:yet he spyed one errour extraordinary, the most notable (in hisopinion) that ever he had seene before. namely, a paultry paire ofbreeches, wickedly made, and worse worne, hanging downe lowe ashalfe his legge, even as he sate upon the bench, yet cut sosparingly of the cloath, that they gaped wide open before, as awheele-barrow might have full entrance allowed it. this strangesight was so pleasing to him; as leaving off further search of hisfriend, and scorning to have such a spectacle alone by himselfe: heewent upon another inquisition; namely, for two other merry lads likehirnselfe, the one being called ribi, and the other matteuzzo, menof the same mirth-full disposition as he was, and therefore the fitterfor his company.
after he had met with them, these were his salutations: my honestboyes, if ever you did me any kindnesse, declare it more effectuallynow, in accompanying me to the court-house, where you shall beholdsuch a singular spectacle, as (i am sure) you never yet saw thelike. forthwith they went along altogether, and being come to thecourthouse, he shewed them the judges hansome paire of breeches,hanging down in such base and beastly manner; that (being as yet farreoff from the bench) their hearts did ake with extreamity oflaughter. but when they came neere to the seat whereon messer niccolaosate, they plainely perceived, that it was very easie to be creptunder, and withall, that the board whereon he set his feet, was rottenand broken, so that it was no difficult matter, to reach it, andpull it downe as a man pleased, and let him fall bare breecht to theground. cheare up your spirits (my hearts) quoth maso, and if yourlonging be like to mine; we will have yonder breeches a good dealelower, for i see how it may be easily done.laying their heads together, plotting and contriving severallwayes, which might be the likelyest to, compasse their intent: each ofthem had his peculiar appointment, to undertake the businessewithout fayling and it was to be performed the next morning. at thehoure assigned, they met there againe, and finding the court wellfilled with people, the plaintiffes and defendants earnestly pleading:matteuzzo (before any body could descry him) was cunningly crept underthe bench, and lay close by the board whereon the judge placed hisfeete. then stept in maso on the right hand of messer niccolao, andtooke fast hold on his gowne before; the like did ribi on the lefthand, in all respects answerable to the other. oh my lord judge (cryedmaso out aloud) i humbly intreat you for charities sake, before thispilfering knave escape away from hence; that i may have justiceagainst him, for stealing my drawing-over stockeings, which he stoutlydenyeth, yet mine owne eyes beheld the deed, it being now not abovefifteene dayes since, when first i bought them for mine owne use.
worthy lord judge (cryed ribi, on the other side) doe not beleevewhat he saith, for he is a paltry lying fellow, and because hee knew icame hither to make my complaint for a male or cloakebag which hestole from me: hee urgeth this occasion for a paire of drawingstockeings, which he delivered me with his owne hands. if yourlordship will not credit me, i can produce as witnesses, trecco theshoemaker, with monna grassa the souse-seller, and he that sweepes thechurch of santa maria a verzaia, who saw him when he came postinghither. maso haling and tugging the judge by the sleeve, would notsuffer him to heare ribi, but cryed out still for justice against him,as he did the like on the contrary side.
during the time of this their clamourous contending, the judge beingvery willy willing to heare either party: matteuzzo, upon a signereceived from the other, which was a word in masoes pleading, laideholde on the broken boord, as also on the judges low-hanging breech,plucking at them both so strongly, that they fell downe immediately,the breeches being onely tyed but with one poynt before. he hearingthe boards breaking underneath him, and such maine pulling at hisbreeches; strove (as he sate) to make them fast before, but thepoynt being broken, and maso crying in his eare on the one side, asribi did the like in the other; hee was at his wits end to defendhimselfe. my lord (quoth maso) you may bee ashamed that you doe me notjustice, why will you not heare mee, but wholly lend your eare to mineadversary? my lord (said ribi) never was libell preferd into thiscourt, of such a paltry trifling matter, and therefore i must, andwill have justice.
by this time the judge was dismounted from the bench, and stood onthe ground, with his slovenly breeches hanging about his heeles:matteuzzo being cunningly stolne away, and undiscovered by any body.ribi, thinking he had shamed the judge sufficiently, went away,protesting, that he would declare his cause in the hearing of awiser judge. and maso forbearing to tugge his gowne any longer, in hisdeparting, said. fare you well sir, you are not worthy to be amagistrate, if you have no more regard of your honour and honesty, butwill put off poore mens suites at your pleasure. so both went severallwayes, and soone were gone out of publike view.
the worshipfull judge messer niccolao stood all this while on theground; and, in presence of all the beholders, trussed up hisbreeches, as if-hee were new risen out of his bed: when betterbethinking himselfe on the matters indifference, he called for the twomen, who contended for the drawing stockings and the cloake-bag; butno one could tell what was become of them. whereupon, he rapt out akinde of judges oath, saying: i will know whether it be law or noheere in florence, to make a judge sit bare breecht on the bench ofjustice, and in the hearing of criminall causes; whereat the chiefepotestate, and all the standers by laughed heartily.
within fewe dayes after, he was informed by some of his especiallfriends, that this had never happened to him, but onely to testifie,how understanding the florentines are, in their ancientconstitutions and customes, to embrace, love and honour, honest,discreet worthy judges and magistrates; whereas on the contrary,they as much condemne miserable knaves, fooles, and dolts, who nevermerit to have any better entertainment. wherefore, it would be bestfor him, to make no more enquiry after the parties; lest a worseinconvenience should happen to him.
the eight day, the sixt novell
wherein is declared, how easily a plaine and simple man may be
made a foole, when he dealeth with crafty companions.
bruno and buffalmaco, did steale a young brawne from calandrino, andfor his recovery thereof, they used a kinde of pretendedconjuration, with pilles made of ginger and strong malmesey. butinstead of this application, they on, they gave him two pilles of adogges dates, or dowsets, confected in alloes, which he receivedeach after the other by meanes whereof they made him beleeve, that heehad robde himselfe. and for feare they should report this theft to hiswife; they made him to goe buy another brawne.
philostratus had no sooner concluded his novell, and the wholeassembly laughed madame thereat: but the queen gave command tomadame philomena, that shee should follow next in order; whereuponthus shee began. worthy ladies, as philostratus, by calling to memoriethe name of maso del saggio, hath contented you with another merrynovell concerning him: in the same manner must i intreat you, toremember once againe calandrino and his subtle by a pretty talewhich i meane to tell ow, and in what manner they were revenged onhim, for going to seeke the invisible stone.
needlesse were any fresh relation to you, what manner of peoplethose three men were, calandrino, bruno, and buffalmaco, becausealready you have had sufficient understanding of them. andtherefore, as an induction to my discourse, i must tell you, thatcalandrino had a small country-house, in a village some-what neereto florence, which came to him by the marriage of his wife. amon othercattle and poultry, which he kept there in store, hee had a youngboare readie fatted for brawne, whereof yearly he used to kill one forhis owne provision; and alwaies in the month of december, he and hiswife resorted to their village house, to have a brawne both killed andsalted.
it came to passe at this time concerning my tale, that the womanbeing somewhat crazie and sickly, by her husbands unkinde usage,whereof you heard so lately; calandrino went alone to the killing ofhis boare, which comming to the hearing of bruno and buffalmaco andthat the woman could by no meanes be there: to passe away the time alittle in merriment, they went to a friendlie companion of theirs,an honest joviall priest, dwelling not farre off from calandrinoescountrey house.
the same morning as the boare was kilde, they all three wentthither, and calandrino seeing them in the priests companie: badthem all heartily welcome; and to acquaint them with his goodhusbandry, hee shewed them his house, and the boare where it hung.they perceyving it to be faire and fat, knowing also, thatcalandrino intended to salt it for his owne store, bruno saide untohim: thou art an asse calandrino, sell thy brawne, and let us makemerrie with the money: then let thy wife know no otherwise, but thatit was stolne from thee, by those theeves which continually hauntcountry houses, especially in such scattering villages.
oh mine honest friends, answered calandrino, your counsell is not tobe followed, neither is my wife so easie to be perswaded: this wer thereadiest way to make your house a hell, and she to become the masterdivell: therefore talke no further, for flatly i will not doe it.albeit they laboured him very earnestly, yet all proved not to aniepurpose: onely he desired them to suppe with him, but in so colde amanner, as they denyed him, and parted thence from him. as they walkedon the way, bruno saide to buffalmaco. shall we three (this night) robhim of his brawne? yea marry (quoth buffalmaco) how is it to bedone? i have (saide bruno) alreadie found the meanes to effect it,if he take it not from the place where last we saw it. let us doe itthen (answered buffalmaco) why should we not do it? sir domine heereand we, will make good cheare with it among our selves. the nimblepriest was as forward as the best; and the match being fully agreedon, bruno thus spake. my delicate sir domine, art and cunning mustbe our maine helps: for thou knowest buffalmaco, what a covetouswretch calandrino is, glad and readie to drink alwaies on other mensexpences: let us go take him with us to the tavern, where the priest(for his owne honour and reputation) shall offer to make paiment ofthe whole reckoning, without receiving a farthing of his, whereof hewill not be a little joyfull, so shall we bring to passe the rest ofthe businesse, because there is no body in the house, but onelyhimselfe: for he is best at ease without company.
as bruno had propounded, so was it accordingly performed, and whencalandrino perceyved, that the priest would suffer none to pay, buthimselfe, he dranke the more freely; and when there was no neede atall, tooke his cuppes couragiously one after another. two or threehoures of the night were spent, before they parted from the taverne,calandrino going directly home to his house, and instantly to bed,without any other supper, imagining that he had made fast his doore,which (indeede) he left wide open: sleeping soundly, without suspitionof any harme intended unto him. buffalmaco and bruno went and suptwith the priest, and so soone as supper was ended, they tooke certaineengines, for their better entering into calandrinoes house, and sowent on to effect theyr purpose. finding the doore standing readieopen, they entered in, tooke the brawne, carried it with them to thepriests house, and afterward went all to bed.
when calandrino had well slept after his wine, he arose in themorning, and being descended downe the staires; finding the streetdoore wide open, he looked for the brawne, but it was gone.enquiring of the neighbours dwelling neere about him, hee couldheare no tydings of his brawne, but became the wofullest man in theworld, telling every one that his brawne was stolne. bruno andbuffalmaco being risen in the morning, they went to visitecalandrino to heare how he tooke the losse of his brawne: and hee nosooner had a sight of them, but he called them to him; and with theteares running downe his cheekes, sayde: ah my deare friendes, i amrobde of my brawne. bruno stepping closely to him, sayde in hiseare: it is wonderfull, that once in thy life time thou canst beewise. how? answered calandrino, i speake to you in good earnest.speake so still in earnest (replied bruno) and cry it out so loud asthou canst, then let who list beleeve it to be true.
calandrino stampt and fretted exceedingly, saying: as i am a trueman to god, my prince, and countrey, i tell thee truly, that my brawneis stolne. say so still i bid thee (answered bruno) and let all theworld beleeve thee, if they list to do so, for i will not. wouldstthou (quoth calandrino) have me damne my selfe to the divell? i seethou dost not credit what i say: but would i were hanged by the necke,if it be not true, that my brawne is stolne. how can it possible be,replyed bruno? did not i see it in thy house yesternight? wouldst thouhave me beleeve, that it is flowne away? although it is not flowneaway (quoth calandrino) yet i am certain, that it is stolne away:for which i am weary of my life, because i dare not go home to mineowne house, in regard my wife will never beleeve it; and yet if sheshould credite it, we are sure to have no peace for a twelve monthsspace.
bruno, seeming as if he were more then halfe sorrowfull, yetsupporting still his former jesting humor, saide: now trust meecalandrino, if it be so; they that did it are much too blame. if it beso? answered calandrino, belike thou wouldst have mee blasphemeheaven, and all the saints therein: i tell thee once againe bruno,that this last night my brawne was stolne. be patient good calandrino,replyed buffalmaco, and if thy brawne be stolne from thee, there aremeans enow to get it againe. meanes enow to get it againe? saidcalandrino, i would faine heare one likely one, and let all the restgo by. i am sure calandrino, answered buffalmaco, thou art verilyperswaded, that no theefe came from india, to steale thy brawne fromthee: in which respect, it must needes then be some of thy neighbours:whom if thou couldst lovingly assemble together, i knowe an experimentto be made with bread and cheese, whereby the party that hath it, willquickly be discovered.
i have heard (quoth bruno) of such an experiment, and helde it to beinfallible; but it extendeth onely unto persons of gentilitie, whereofthere are but few dwelling heere about, and in the case of stealinga brawne, it is doubtfull to invite them, neither can there be anycertainty of their comming. i confesse what you say, aunsweredbuffalmaco, to be very true: but then in this matter, so nerelyconcerning us to be done, and for a deare friend, what is your advice?i would have pilles made of ginger, compounded with your best andstrongest malmsey, then let the ordinary sort of people be invited(for such onely are most to be mistrusted) and they will not faileto come, because they are utterly ignorant of our intention.besides, the pilles may as well bee hallowed and consecrated, as breadand cheese on the like occasion. indeede you say true (replyedbuffalmaco) but what is the opinion of calandrino? is he willing tohave this tryall made, or no? yes, by all meanes, answered calandrino,for gladly i would know who hath stolne my brawne; and your good wordshave (more then halfe) comforted me already in this case.
well then (quoth bruno) i will take the paines to go to florence, toprovide all things necessarie for this secret service; but i mustbee furnished with money to effect it. calandrino had some fortyshillings then about him, which he delivered to bruno, who presentlywent to florence, to a frend of his an apothecarie, of whom hebought a pound of white ginger, which hee caused him to make uppe insmall pilles: and two other beside of a dogges-dates or dowsets,confected all over with strong aloes, yet well moulded in sugare, asall the rest were: and because they should the more easily beeknowne from the other, they were spotted with gold, in verie formalland physicall manner. he bought moreover, a big flaggon of the bestmalmesey, returning backe with all these things to calandrino, anddirecting him in this order.
you must put some friend in trust, to invite your neighbors(especially such as you suspect) to a breakfast in the morning: andbecause it is done as a feast in kindnesse, they will come to youthe more willingly. this night will i and buffalmaco take suchorder, that the pilles shall have the charge imposed on them, and thenwee will bring them hither againe in the morning: and i, my selfe (foryour sake) will deliver them to your guests, and performe whatsoeveris to bee sayde or done. on the next morning, a goodly company beingassembled, under a faire elme before the church; as well youngflorentynes (who purposely came to make themselves merry) asneighbouring husbandmen of the village: bruno was to begin theservice, with the pils in a faire cup, and buffalmaco followed himwith another cup, to deliver the wine out of the flaggon, all thecompany beeing set round, as in a circle; and bruno with buffalmacobeing in the midst of them, bruno thus spake.honest friends, it is fit that i should acquaint you with theoccasion, why we are thus met together, and in this place: becauseif anie thing may seeme offensive to you; afterward you shall makeno complaint of me. from calandrino (our loving friend heerepresent) yesternight there was a new-kild fat brawne taken, but whohath done the deede, as yet he knoweth not; and because none other,but some one (or more) heere among us, must needs offend in this case:he, desiring to understand who they be, would have each man to receiveone of these pilles, and afterward to drinke of this wine; assuringyou all, that whosoever stole the brawne hence, cannot be able toswallow the pill: for it wil be so extreme bitter in his mouth, asit will enforce him to coughe and spet extraordinarily. in whichrespect, before such a notorious shame be received, and in so goodlyan assembly, as now are heere present: it were much better for himor them that have the brawne, to confesse it in private to this honestpriest, and i will abstaine from urging anie such publike proofe.
every one there present answered, that they were well contented bothto eate and drinke, and let the shame fall where it deserved;whereupon, bruno appointing them how they should sit, and placingcalandrino as one among them: he began his counterfeite exorcisme,giving each man a pill, and buffalmaco a cup of wine after it. butwhen he came to calandrino, hee tooke one of them which was made ofthe dogges dates or dowsets, and delivering it into his hand,presently hee put it into his mouth and chewed it. so soone as histongue tasted the bitter aloes, he began to coughe and spet extreamly,as being utterly unable, to endure the bitternesse and noysomesmell. the other men that had receyved the pils, beganne to gaze oneupon another, to see whose behaviour should discover him; and brunohaving not (as yet) delivered pils to them all, proceeded on stillin his businesse, as seeming not to heare any coughing, till onebehinde him, saide. what meaneth calandrino by this spetting andcoughing?
bruno sodainely turning him about, and seeing calandrino to coughand spet in such sort, saide to the rest. be not too rash (honestfriends) in judging of any man, some other matter (then the pille) mayprocure this coughing, wherfore he shall receive another, the betterto cleare your beleefe concerning him. he having put the secondprepared pill into his mouth, while bruno went to serve the rest ofthe guests: if the first was exceeding bitter to his taste, this othermade it a great deale worse, for teares streamed forth of his eyesas bigge as cherry-stones, and champing and chewing the pill, ashoping it would overcome his coughing; he coughed and spette themore violently, and in grosser manner then he did before, nor did theygive him any wine to helpe it.
buffalmaco, bruno, and the whole company, perceiving how hecontinued still his coughing and spetting, saide all with one voyce,that calandrino was the theefe to him selfe: and gave him manie grossespeeches beside, all departing home unto their houses, very muchdispleased and angry with him. after they were gone, none remainedwith him but the priest, bruno and buffalmaco, who thus spake tocalandrino. i did ever thinke, that thou wast the theefe thy selfe,yet thou imputedst thy robbery to some other, for feare we should oncedrinke freely of thy purse, as thou hast done many times of ours.calandrino, who had not yet ended his coughing and spetting, swaremany bitter oathes, that his brawne was stolne from him. talke so longas thou wilt, quoth buffalmaco, thy knavery is both knowne andseene, and well thou mayst be ashamed of thy selfe. calandrino hearingthis, grew desperately angry; and to incense him more, bruno thuspursued the matter.
heare me calandrino, for i speake to thee in honest earnest, therewas a man in the company, who did eate and drinke heere among thyneighbours, and plainly told me, that thou keptst a young lad heere todo thee service, feeding him with such victuals as thou couldst spare,by him thou didst send away thy brawne, to one that bought it ofthee for foure crownes, onely to cousen thy poore wife and us. canstthou not yet learne to leave thy mocking and scorning? thou hastforgotte, how thou broughtst us to the plaine of mugnone, to seeke forblack invisible stones: which having found, thou concealedst them tothy selfe, stealing home invisibly before us, and making us followlike fooles after thee.
now likewise, by horrible lying oathes, and perjuredprotestations, thou wouldst make us beleeve, that the brawne (whichthou hast cunningly sold for ready money) was stolne from thee outof thy house, when thou art onely the theefe to thy selfe, as bythat excellent rule of art (which never faileth) hath plainly, tothy shame, appeared. wee being so well acquainted with thydelusions, and knowing them perfectly; now do plainly tell thee,that we mean not to be foold any more. nor is it unknowne to thee,what paines wee have taken, in making this singular peece of proofe.wherefore we inflict this punishment on thee, that thou shalt bestowon this honest priest and us, two couple of capons, and a flaggon ofwine, or else we will discover this knavery of thine to thy wife.
calandrino perceiving, that all his protestations could winne nocredit with them, who had now the law remaining in their owne hands,and purposed to deale with him as they pleased: apparantly saw, thatsighing and sorrow did nothing availe him. moreover, to fall intohis wives tempestuous stormes of chiding, would bee worse to himthen racking or torturing: he gladly therefore gave them money, to buythe two couple of capons and wine, being heartily contentedlikewise, that hee was so well delivered from them. so the merrypriest, bruno, and buffalmaco, having taken good order for salting thebrawne; closely carried it with them to florence, leaving calandrinoto complaine of his losse, and well requited, for mocking them withthe invisible stones.
the eight day, the seventh novell
serving as an admonition to all ladies and gentlewomen, not to
mock or scorne gentlemen-schollers, when they make meanes of
love to them: except they intend to seeke their owne
shame, by disgracing them
a young gentleman being a scholler, fell in love with a ladie, namedhelena, she being a widdow, and addicted in affection to anothergentleman. one whole night in cold winter, she caused the schollerto expect her comming, in an extreame frost and snow. in revengewhereof, by his imagined art and skill, he made her to stand nakedon the top of a tower, the space of a whole day, and in the hot monethof july, to be sunburnt and bitten with waspes and flies.
greatly did the ladies commend madame philomenaes novell, laughingheartily at poore calandrino, yet grieving withall, that he shouldbe so knavishly cheated, not onely of his brawne, but two couple ofcapons, and a flaggon of wine beside. but the whole discourse beingended; the queene commanded madame pampinea, to follow next with hernovell, and presently she thus began. it hapneth oftentimes (brightbeauties) that mockery falleth on him, that intended the same untoanother: and there. fore i am of opinion, that there is very litlewisedom declared on him or her, who taketh delight in mocking anyperson. must needs confesse, that we have smiled at many mockeries anddeceits, related in those excellent novels, which we have alreadyheard: without any due revenge returned, but onely in this last ofsilly calandrino. wherefore, it is now my determination, to urge akind of compassionate apprehension, upon a very just retribution,happening to a gentlewoman of our citie, because her scorne felldeservedly upon her selfe, remaining mocked, and to the perill ofher life. let me then assure you, that your diligent attention mayredound to your benefit, because if you keepe your selves(henceforward) from being scorned by others: you shall expresse thegreater wisedome, and be the better warned by their mishaps.
as yet there are not many yeares overpast, since there dwelt inflorence, a yong lady, descended of noble parentage, verybeautifull, of sprightly courage, and sufficiently abounding in thegoods of fortune, she being named madame helena. her delight was tolive in the estate of widdowhood, desiring to match her selfe nomore in marriage, because she bare affection to a gallant younggentleman, whom she had made her private election of, and with whom(having excluded all other amorous cares and cogitations) by meanes ofher waitingwoman, she had divers meetings, and kinde conferences.
it chanced at the verie same time, another young gentleman of ourcitie, called reniero, having long studied in the schooles at paris,returned home to florence, not to make sale of his learning andexperience, as many doe: but to understand the reason of things, asalso the causes and effects of them, which is mervailously fitting forany gentleman. being greatly honoured and esteemed of every one, aswell for his courteous carriage towards all in generall, as for hisknowledge and excellent parts: he lived more like a familiarcitizen, then in the nature of a courtly gentleman, albeit he waschoisely respected in either estate.
but, as oftentimes it commeth to passe, that such as are endued withthe best judgement and understanding in naturall occasions, aresoonest caught and intangled in the snares of love: so fel it out withour scholler reniero, who being invited to a solemne feast, in companyof other his especiall friends; this lady helena, attyred in herblacke garments (as widowes commonly use to wear) was likewise there aguest. his eye observing her beauty and gracious demeanour, she seemedin his judgement, to be a woman so compleate and perfect, as he hadnever seene her equall before: and therefore, he accounted the manmore then fortunate, that was worthy to embrace her in his armes.continuing this amorous observation of her from time to time, andknowing withall, that rare and excellent things are not easilyobtained, but by painefull study, labour, and endeavour: heeresolved with himselfe constantly, to put in practise all his bestparts of industry, onely to honour and please her, and attaining toher contentation, it would be the means to winne her love, andcompasse thereby his hearts desire.
the yong lady, who fixed not her eyes on inferiour subjects (butesteemed her selfe above ordinary reach or capacity) could moovethem artificially, as curious women well know how to doe, looking onevery side about her, yet not in a gadding or grosse manner: forshe was not ignorant in such darting glaunces, as proceeded from anenflamed affection, which appearing plainely in reniero; with a prettysmile, shee said to her selfe. i am not come hither this day in vaine;for, if my judgement faile me not, i thinke i have caught awoodcocke by the bill. and lending him a cunning looke or two,queintly caried with the corner of her eye; she gave him a kinde ofperswading apprehension, that her heart was the guide to her eye.and in this artificial schoole-tricke of hers, shee carryedtherewith another consideration, to wit, that the more other eyesfedde themselves on her perfections, and were (well-neere) lost inthem beyond recovery: so much the greater reason had he to account hisfortune beyond comparison, that was the sole master of her heart,and had her love at his command.
our witty scholler having set aside his philosophicallconsiderations, strove how he might best understand her carriagetoward him, and beleeving that she beheld him with pleasing regards;hee learned to know the house where shee dwelt, passing daily by thedoore divers times, under colour of some more serious occasions:wherein the lady very proudly gloried, in regard of the reasons beforealleadged, and seemed to affoord him lookes of goode liking. being ledthus with a hopefull perswasion, bee found the meanes to gaineacquaintance with her waiting-woman, revealing to her his intireaffection, desiring her to worke for him in such sort with her lady,that his service might be gracious in her acceptance. thegentlewoman made him a very willing promise, and immediately did hiserrand to her lady; who heard her with no small pride andsquemishnesse, and breaking forth into a scornefull laughter, thus shespake.
ancilla (for so she was named) dost thou not observe, how thisscholler is come to lose all the wit heere, which he studyed so longfor in the university of paris? let us make him our onely tableargument, and seeing his folly soareth so high, we will feed himwith such a dyet as hee deserveth. yet when thou speakest next withhim, tell him, that i affect him more then he can doe me; but itbecommeth me to be carefull of mine honour, and to walke with anuntainted brow, as other ladies and gentlewomen doe: which he is notto mislike, if he be so wise as he maketh shew of, but rather will themore commend me. alas good lady lack-wit, little did she understand(faire assembly) how dangerous a case it is [to] deale with schollers.
at his next meeting with the waiting woman, shee delivered themessage, as her lady had commanded her, whereof poore reniero was sojoyfull: that hee pursued his love-suite the more earnestly, and beganto write letters, send gifts, and tokens, all which were stillreceived, yet without any other answere to give hope, but onely ingenerall, and thus shee dallied with him a long while. in the end, shediscovered this matter to her secret chosen friend, who fellsuddenly sicke of the head-ake, onely through meere conceit ofjealousie: which she perceiving, and grieving to be suspectedwithout any cause, especially by him whom shee esteemed above allother; shee intended to rid him quickely of that idle disease. andbeing more and more solicited by the scholler, she sent him word byher maide ancilla, that (as yet) she could find no convenientopportunity, to yeeld him such assurance, as hee should not any way bedistrustfull of her love.
but the feast of christmas was now neere at hand, which affordedleisures much more hopefull, then any other formerly passed. andtherefore, the next night after the first feasting day, if hepleased to walke in the open court of her house: she would soonesend for him, into a place much better beseeming, and where they mightfreely converse together.
now was our scholler the onely jocond man of the world, and failednot the time assigned him, but went unto the ladies house, whereancilla was ready to give him entertainment, conducting him into thebase court, where she lockt him up fast, untill her lady should sendfor him. this night shee had privately sent for her friend also, andsitting merrily at supper with him, told him, what welcome she hadgiven the scholler, and how she further meant to use him, saying.now sir, consider with your selfe, what hot affection i beare tohim, of whom you became so fondly jealous. the which words were verywelcome to him, and made him extraordinarily joyful; desiring to seethem as effectually performed, as they appeared to him by herprotestations.
heere you are to understand (gracious ladies) that according tothe season of the yeare, a great snow had falne the day before, soas the whole court was covered therewith, and being an extreamefrost upon it, our scholler could not boast of any warme walking, whenthe teeth quivered in his head with cold, as a dog could not be morediscourteously used: yet hope of enjoying loves recompence atlength, made him to support all this injury with admirable patience.
within a while after, madame helena said to her friend. walke withme (deare sal heart) into my chamber, and there at a secret littlewindow, i shall shew thee what he doth, that drove thee to such asuspition of me, and we shall heare beside, what answere he willgive my maide ancilla, whom i will send to comfort him in hiscoldnesse.
when she had so said, they went to the appointed chamber window,where they could easily see him, but he not them: and then theyheard ancilla also, calling to him forth of another windowe, saying.signior reniero, my lady is the wofullest woman in the world,because (as yet) she cannot come to you, in regard that one of herbrethren came this evening to visite her, and held her with muchlonger discourse then she expected: whereby she was constrained toinvite him to sup with her, and yet he is not gone; but shortly i hopehee will, and then expect her comming presently; till when, sheentreateth your gentle sufferance.
poore renicro, our over-credulous scholler, whose vehement affectionto madame helena, so hood-winkt the sight of his understanding, ashe could not be distrustfull of any guilt; returned this answere toancilla. say to your lady that i am bound in duty, to attend thegood houre of her leisure, without so much as the very leastprejudicate conceite in me: neverthelesse, entreat her, to let itbee so soone as she possibly may, because here is miserable walking,and it beginneth againe to snow extreamely. ancilla making fast thecasement, went presently to bed; when helena spake thus to her amorousfriend. what saist thou now? doest thou thinke that i loved him, asthou wast afraid of? if i did, he should never walke thus in the frostand snow. so, away went they likewise from their close gazingwindow, and spent wanton dalliances together, laughing, and deriding(with many bitter taunts and jests) the lamentable condition ofpoore reniero.
about the court walked hee numberlesse times, finding such exercisesas he could best devise, to compasse warmth in any manner: no seate orshelter had he any where, either to ease himselfe by sitting downe awhile, or keepe him from the snow, falling continually on him, whichmade him bestow many curses on the ladies brother, for his so longtarrying with her, as beleeving him verily to be in the house, or elseshe would (long before) have admitted his entrance, but therein hishope was meerely deceived. it grew now to be about the houre ofmidnight, and helena had delighted her selfe with her friendextraordinarily, til at last, thus she spake to him. what is thineopinion of my amourous scholler? which dost thou imagine to be thegreatest, either his sense and judgement, or the affection i beareto him? is not this cold sufferance of his, able to quench the violentheat of his loves extremitie, and having so much snow broth to helpeit? beleeve me (sweet lady) quoth her friend, as hee is a man, and alearned scholler, i pitty that he should bee thus ungently dealtwithall: but as he is my rivall and loves enemy, i cannot allow himthe least compassion, resting the more confidently assured of yourlove to me, which i will alwayes esteeme most precious.
when they had spent a long while in this or the like conference,with infinite sweet kisses and embraces intermixed; then she beganagaine in this manner. deare love (quoth she) cast thy cloake aboutthee, as i intend to doe with my night mantle, and let us step tothe little window once more, to see whether the flaming fire, whichburned in the schollers brest (as daily avouched to me in his loveletters) be as yet extinct or no. so going to the window againe, andlooking downe into the court; there they saw the scholler dancing inthe snow, to the cold tune of his teeths quivering and chattering, andclapping his armes about his body, which was no pleasing melody tohim. how thinkest thou now sweet heart (saide cannot i make a mandaunce without the sound of a taber, or of a bagpipe? yes beleeve melady (quoth he) i plaine pereive you can, and would be very lothe,that at should exercise your cunning on me.
nay, said shee, we will yet delight our selves a little more; let ussoftly descend downe the stayres, even so farre as to the court doore:thou shalt not speake a word, but i will talke to him, and hearesome part of his quivering language, which cannot choose but beepassing pleasing for us to heare.
out of the chamber went they, and descended downe the stayres to thecourt doore; where, without opening it, she laide her mouth to a smallcranny, and in a low soft kinde of voyce, called him by his name:which the scholler hearing, was exceeding joyful, as beleeving verily,that the houre of his deliverance was come, and entrance now should beadmitted him. upon the hearing of her voyce, hee stept close to thedoore, saying. for charities sake, good lady, let me come in,because i am almost dead with cold; whereto thus she answered inmocking manner. i make no doubt (my deare friend reniero) but thenight is indifferent colde, and yet somewhat the warmer by thesnowes falling: and i have heard that such weather as this, istenne-times more extreame at paris, then heere in our warmer countrey.and trust me, i am exceeding sorrowfull, that i may not (as yet)open the doore, because mine unhappy brother, who came (unexpected)yester-night to suppe with mee, is not yet gone, as within a shortwhile (i hope) he will, and then shall i gladly set open the dooreto you, for i made an excuse to steale a little from him, onely tocheare you with this small kind of comfort, that his so longtarrying might be the lesse offensive to you.
alas sweet madame, answered quaking and quivering reniero, bee thenso favourable to me, as to free me from forth this open court, wherethere is no shelter or helpe for me, the snow falling still soexceedingly, as a man might easily be more then halfe buried in it:let me but within your doore, and there i will wait your own goodleisure. alas deare reniero (answered helena) i dare not doe it,because the doore maketh such a noyse in the opening, as it will betoo easily heard by my brother: but i will goe and use such meanes, asshortly hee shall get him gone, and then i dare boldly give youentrance. doe so good madame, replyed reniero, and let there be afaire fire made ready, that when i am within, i may the sooner warmemy selfe; for i am so strangely benummed with colde, as well-neere iam past all sence of feeling.
can it be possible (quoth helena) that you should be so benummedwith colde? then i plainely perceive, that men can lye in their loveletters, which i can shew under your own hand, how you fryed inflames, and all for my love, and so have you written to me in everyletter. poore credulous women are often thus deluded, in beleevingwhat men write and speake out of passion: but i will returne backeto my brother, and make no doubt of dispatch, because i would gladlyhave your company.
the amourous friend to helena, who stood by all this while, laughingat the schollers hard usage, returned up againe with her to herchamber, where they could not take a jote of rest, for flouting andscorning the betrayed scholler, as for him poore man, hee was becomelike the swanne, coldly chattering his teeth together, in a strangenew kinde of harmony to him. and perceiving himselfe to be meerelymocked, he attempted to get open the doore, or how he might passeforth at any other place; but being no way able to compasse it, hewalked up and downe like an angry lyon, cursing the hard quality ofthe time, the discourtesie of the lady, the over-tedious length of thenight; but (most of all) his owne folly and simplicity, in being sobasely abused and gulde. now began the heat of his former affection tohelena, altered into as violent a detestation of her; yea, extremityof hatred in the highest degree; beating his braines, and ransackingevery corner of in. vention, by what meanes he might best berevenged on her, which now he more earnestly desired to effect, thento enjoy the benefit of her love, or to be embraced betweene herarmes.
after that the sad and discomfortable night had spent it selfe,and the break of day was beginning to appeare; ancilla thewaiting-woman, according as she was instructed by her lady, went downeand opened the court doore, and seeming exceedingly to compassionatethe schollers unfortunate night of sufferance, saide unto him.
alas courteous gentleman, in an unblessed houre came my ladyesbrother hither yesternight, inflicting too much trouble upon us, and agrievous time of affliction to you. but i am not ignorant, that youbeing vertuous, and a judicious scholler, have an invincible spirit ofpacience, and sufficient understanding withall; that what this nightcould not affoord, another may make a sound amends for. this i can anddare sufficiently assure you, that nothing could be more displeasingto my lady, neither can she well be quieted in her mind: untill shehave made a double and treble requitall, for such a strange unexpectedinconvenience, whereof she had not the very least suspition.
reniero swelling with discontentment, yet wisely clouding it fromopen apprehension, and knowing well enough, that such goldenspeeches and promises, did alwaies savour of what intemperatespleene would more lavishly have vented foorth, and therefore in amodest dissembling manner; without the least shew of any anger, thushe answered.
in good sadnesse ancilla, i have endured the most miserablestnight of cold, frost and snow, that ever any poore gentleman suffered;but i know well enough, your lady was not in any fault thereof,neither meriteth to be blamed, for in her owne person (as being truelycompassionate of my distresse) she came so farre as the doore ofthis court, to excuse her selfe, and comfort mee. but as you saide,and very well too, what hath failed this night, another hereaftermay more fortunately performe: in hope whereof, commend my love andduteous service to her, and (what else remaineth mine) to yourgentle selfe.
so our halfe frozen scholler, scarcely able to walke upon hislegges, returned home, (so well as hee could) to his owne lodging;where, his spirits being grievously out of order, and his eyes staringgastly through lacke of sleepe: he lay downe on h bed, and after alittle rest, he found himselfe in much worse condition then before, asmeerely taken lame in his armes and his legges. whereupon he wasinforced to send for phisitions, to be advised by their councell, insuch an extremity of cold received. immediately, they made provisionfor his healthes remedie (albeit his nerves and sinewes could veryhardly extend themselves) yet in regard he was yong, and summerswiftly drawing on; they had the better hope of affecting his safty,out of so great and dangerous a cold.
but after he was become almost well and lusty againe, hee used to beseldome seene abroad for an indifferent while; concealing his intendedrevenge secret to himselfe, yet appearing more affectionate tomadame helena, then formerly he had beene.
now, it came to passe (within no long while after) that fortunebeing favourable to our injured scholler, prepared a new accident,wherby he might fully effect his harts desire. for the lusty yonggallant, who was madame helenaes deare darling and delight, and (forwhose sake) she dealt so inhumanely with poore reniero: became wearyof her amourous service, and was falne in liking of another lady,scorning and disdaining his former mistresse; whereat shee grewexceedingly displeased, and began to languish in sighes and teares.
but ancilla her waiting-woman, compassionating the perilouscondition of her lady, and knowing no likely meanes whereby to conquerthis oppressing melancholly, which shee suffered for the losse ofher hearts chosen friend: at length she began to consider, that thescholler still walked daily by the doore, as formerly hee was wontto doe, and (by him) there might some good be done.
a fond and foolish opinion overswayed her, that the scholler wasextraordinarily skilfull in the art of nigromancy, and could therebyso over-rule the heart of her lost friend, as hee should bee compelledto love her againe, in as effectuall manner as before; herewithimmediately she acquainted her lady, who being as rashly credulous, asher maide was opinionative (never considring, that if the scholler hadany experience in negromancy, hee would thereby have procured his ownesuccesse) gave releefe to her surmise, in very joviall and comfortablemanner, and entreated her in all kindnes, to know of him, whether hecould worke such a businesse, or no, and (upon his undertaking toeffect it) shee would give absolute assurance, that (in recompencethereof) he should unfainedly obtaine his hearts desire. ancilla wasquicke and expeditious, in delivering this message to discontentedreniero, whose soule being ready to mount out of his body, onely byconceit of joy; chearefully thus he said within himselfe. graciousfortune! how highly am i obliged to thee for this so great favour? nowthou hast blest me with a happy time, to be justly revenged on sowicked a woman, who sought the utter ruine of my life, in recompenceof the unfaigned affection i bare her. returne to thy lady (quothhe) and saluting her first on my behalfe, bid her to abandon allcare in this businesse; for, if her amourous friend were in india, iwould make him come (in meere despight of his heart) and crave mercyof her for his base transgression. but concerning the meanes how,and in what manner it is to bee done, especially on her ownebehalfe: i will impart it to her so soone as she pleaseth: faile notto tell her so constantly from me, with all my utmost paines at herservice.
ancilla came jocondly home with her answere, and a conclusion wasset downe for their meeting together at santa lucia del prato, whichaccordingly was performed, in very solemne conference between them.her fond affection had such power over her, that shee had forgot, intowhat peril she brought his life, by such an unnatural nightwalke:but disclosed all her other intention to him, how loth she was to loseso deare a friend, and desiring him to exercise his utmost height ofskil, with large promises of her manifold favours to him, wheretoour scholler thus replyed.
very true it is madam, that among other studies at paris, ilearned the art of negromancy, the depth whereof i am as skilfullin, as anie other scholler whatsoever. but, because it is greatlydispleasing unto god, i made a vow never to use it, either for myselfe, or anie other. neverthelesse, the love i beare you is of suchpower, as i know not well how to denie, whatsoever you please tocommand me: in which respect, if in doing you my very best service,i were sure to bee seized on by all the divels: i will not faile toaccomplish your desire, you onely having the power to command me.but let me tell you madame, it is a matter not so easie to beperformed, as you perhaps may rashly imagine, especially, when a womanwould repeale a man to love her, or a man a woman: because, it isnot to be done, but by the person whom it properly concerneth. andtherefore it behoveth, that such as would have this businesseeffected, must be of a constant minde, without the least scruple offeare: because it is to be accomplished in the darke night season,in which difficulties i doe not know, how you are able to warrant yourselfe, or whether you have such courage of spirit, as (with boldnes)to adventure.
madame helena, more hot in pursuite of her amorous contentment, thenany way governed by temperate discretion, presently thus answered.sir, love hath set such a keene edge on my unconquerable affection, asthere is not any daunger so difficult, but i dare resolutely undertakeit, for the recovery of him, who hath so shamefullie refused mykindnesse: wherefore (if you please) shew mee, wherein i must be soconstant and dreadlesse. the scholler, who had (more then halfe)caught a right ninnyhammer by the beake, thus replyed. madame, ofnecessity i must make an image of tin, in the name of him whom youdesire to recall. which when i have sent you, the moone being thenin her full, and your selfe stript starke naked: immediately afteryour first sleepe, seaven times you must bathe your selfe with it in aswift running river. afterward, naked as you are, you must climbe upupon some tree, or else upon an uninhabited house top, wherestanding dreadlesse of any perill, and turning your face to the north,with the image in your hand, seaven times you must speake such wordes,as i will deliver to you in writing.
after you have so often spoken them, two goodly ladies (the veryfairest that ever you beheld) wil appeare unto you, very graciouslysaluting you, and demanding what you would have them to performe foryou. safely you may speake unto them, and orderly tel them what youdesire: but be very careful, that you name not one man insted ofanother. when you have uttered your mind, they wil depart from you,and then you may descend againe, to the place where you did leave yourgarments, which having putte on, then returne to your house. andundoubtedly, before the midst of the next night following, your friendwil come in teares to you, and humbly crave your pardon on hisknees; beeing never able afterward to be false to you, or leave yourlove for any other whatsoever.
the lady hearing these words, gave very setled beleefe to them,imagining unfainedly, that shee had (more then halfe) recovered herfriend already, and held him embraced between her armes: in whichjocond perswasion, the chearful blood mounted up into hir cheekes, andthus she replyed.
never make you any doubt sir, but that i can sufficiently performewhatsoever you have said, and am provided of the onely place in theworld, where such a weighty businesse is to be effected. for i havea farme or dairy house, neere adjoyning to the vale of arno, andclosely bordering upon the same river. it beeing now the moneth ofjuly, the most convenientest time of all the yeare to bathe in; ican bee the easier induced thereunto.
moreover, there is hard by the rivers side a smal tower or turretuninhabited; whereinto few people do sildome enter, but onelyheardsmen or flocke-keepers, who ascend uppe (by the helpe of a woddenladder) to a tarrasse on the top of the saide tower, to looke allabout for their beasts, when they are wandred astray: it standing in asolitary place, and out of the common way or resort. there dare iboldly adventure to mount up, and with the invincible courage of awronged lady (not fearing to looke death himself in the face) do althat you have prescribed, yea, and much more, to recover my deare lostlover againe, whom i value equal with my owne life.
reniero, who perfectly knew both the dairy farme, and the old smalturret, not a little joyful, to heare how forward shee was to shameher selfe, answered in this manner. madame, i was never in those partsof the country, albeit they are so neere to our city, and therfore imust needs be ignorant, not onely of your farme, but the turretalso. but if they stand in such convenient manner as you havedescribed, all the world could not yeelde the like elsewhere, so aptand sutable to your purpose: wherefore, with such expedition aspossibly can use, i will make the image, and send it you, as alsothe charme, verie fairely written. but let me entreate you, thatwhen you have obtayned your hearts desire, and are able to judgetruely of my love and service: not to be unmindfull of me, but (atyour best leysure) to performe what you have with such protestationspromised; which shee gave him her hand and faith to do, without anyimpeach or hinderance: and so parting, she returned home to her house.
our over-joyed scholler, applauding his happy starres, forfurthering him with faire a way to his revenge; immagining that it wasalready halfe executed, made the image in due forme, and wrote anold fable, insted of a charme; both which he sent to the lady, sosoone as he thought the time to be fitting: and this admonitionwithall, that the moone being entering into the full, without anylonger delay, she might venter on the businesse the next nightfollowing; and remaine assured to repossesse her friend. afterward forthe better pleasing of himselfe, he went secretly attended, onely byhis servant, to the house of a trusty frend of his, who dweltsomwhat neere to the turret, there to expect the issue of thislady-like enterprize. and madam helena accompanied with none butancilla walked on to her dairy farme, where the night ensuing,pretending to take her rest sooner then formerly she used to doe,she commanded ancilla to bed, referring her selfe to her best liking.
after she had to her first sleepe (according to the schollersdirection) departing softly out of her chamber, she went on towardsthe ancient tower, standing hard by the river of arno, looking everyway heedfully about hir, least she should be spied by any person.but perceiving hir selfe to be so secure as she could desire;putting off all her garments, she hid them in a small brake of bushes:afterward, holding the image in hir hand, seven times she bathd hirbody in the river, and then returned with it to the tower. thescholler, who at the nights closing up of day, had hid himselfeamong the willowes and other trees, which grew very thick about thetower, saw both hir going and returning from the river, and as shepassed thus naked by him, he plainly perceyved, that the nightsobscurity could not cloud the delicate whitenes of hir body, butmade the starres themselves to gaze amorously on her, even as ifthey were proud to behold her bathing, and (like so many twinklingtapers) shewed hir in emulation of another diana. now, whatconflicts this sight caused in the mind of our scholler, one while,quenching his hatefull spleen towards hir, al coveting to imbrace apiece of such perfection: another while, thinking it a purchase fitfor one of cupids soldiers, to seize and surprize hir uppon so fairean advantage, none being to yeild her rescue: in the fiery triall ofsuch temptations, i am not able to judge, or to say, what resistanceflesh and blood could make, being opposed with such a sweet enemy.
but he well considering what she was, the greatnes of his injury, asalso how, and for whom: he forgot all wanton allurements of love,scorning to entertaine a thought of compassion, continuing constant inhis resolution, to let her suffer, as he himselfe had done. so, helenabeing mounted up on the turret, and turning her face towards thenorth; she repeated those idle frivolous words (composed in the natureof a charme) which shee had received from the scholler. afterward,by soft and stealing steps, hee went into the old tower, and tookeaway the ladder, whereby she ascended to the tarras, staying andlistening, how shee proceeded in her amorous exorcisme.
seven times she rehearsed the charme to the image, looking stillwhen the two ladies would appeare in their likenesse, and so longshe held on her imprecations (feeling greater cold, then willinglieshe would have done) that breake of day began to shew it selfe, andhalfe despairing of the ladies comming, according as the schollerbad promised, she said to her selfe: i much misdoubt, that renierohath quitted me with such another peece of night-service, as it was mylucke to bestow on him: but if he have done it in that respect, heewas but ill advised in his revenge, because the night wants nowthree parts of the length, as then it had: and the cold which hesuffered, was far superior in quality to mine, albeit it is more sharpnow in the morning, then all the time of night it hath bin.
and, because day-light should not discover her on the tarrasse,she went to make her descent downe againe: but finding the ladder tobe taken away, and thinking how her publike shame was nowinevitable, her heart dismayed, and shee fell downe in a swoune on thetarras: yet recovering her senses afterward, her greefe and sorrow ex.ceeded all capacity of utterance. for, now she became fully perswaded,that this proceeded from the schollers malice, repenting for herunkinde usage towards him, but much more condemning her selfe, forreposing any trust in him, who stood bound (by good reason) to beher enemy.
continuing long in this extreame affliction, and surveighing alllikely meanes about her, whereby she might descend from the tarras,whereof she was wholly disappointed: she began to sighe and weepeexceedingly, and in this heavy perplexity of spirit, thus sheecomplained to her selfe. miserable and unfortunate helena, what willbe saide by thy bretheren, kindred, neighbours, and generalliethroughout all florence, when they shall know, that thou wast foundeheere on this turret, starke naked? thine honourable carriage, andhonesty of life, heeretofore free from a thought of suspition, shallnow be branded with detestation; and if thou wouldst cloud thismishappe of thine, by such lies and excuses, as are not rare amongstwomen: yet reniero that wicked scholler, who knoweth all thy privycompacting, will stand as a thousand witnesses against thee, and shamethee before the whole city, so both thine honor and loved friend arelost for ever.
having thus consulted with her selfe, many desperate motionsentred her minde, to throw her selfe headlong from off the tarras;till better thoughts wone possession of her soule. and the sunne beingrisen, shee went to every corner of the tarras, to espye any ladcome abroad with his beasts, by whom she might send for herwaitingwoman. about this instant, the scholler who lay sleeping (allthis while) under a bush, suddenly awaking; saw her looke over thewall, and she likewise espyed him; whereupon hee said unto her. goodmorrow madame helena, what? are the ladies come yet or no? helenabearing his scorning question, and grieving that hee should sodelude her: in teares and lamentations, she intreated him to comeneere the tower, because she desired to speake with him. whichcourtesie he did not deny her, and she lying groveling upon herbrest on the tarras, to hide her body that no part thereof might beseene, but her head; weeping, she spake thus to him.
reniero, upon my credit, if i gave thee an ill nights rest, thouhast well revenged that wrong on me; for, although wee are now inthe moneth of july, i have beene plagued with extremity of colde (inregard of my nakednesse) even almost frozen to death: beside mycontinuall teares and lamenting, that folly perswaded me to beleevethy protestations, wherein i account it well-neere miraculous, thatmine eyes should be capable of any sight. and therefore i pray thee,lot in respect of any love which thou canst pretend to beare me; butfor regard of thine owne selfe, being a gentleman and a scholler, thatthis punishment which thou hast already inflicted upon me, may sufficefor or my former injuries towards thee, and to hold selfe revengedfully, as also permit my garments to be brought me, that i may descendfrom hence, without taking th it from me, which afterward (althoughthou wouldst) thou canst never restore me, i meane mine honour. andconsider with thy selfe, that albeit thou didst not injoy my companythat unhappy night, yet thou hast power to command me at any timewhen soever, with making many diversities of amends, for one nightsoffence only committed. content thy selfe then good reniero, and asthou art an honest gentleman, say thou art sufficiently revenged onme, in making me dearely confesse mine owne errour.
never exercise thy malice upon a poore weake woman, for the eagledisdaineth to pray on the yeelding dove: and therefore in meere pitty,and for manhoods sake, be my release from open shame and reproch.
the scholler, whose envious spleene was swolne very great, inremembring such a malicious cruelty exercised on him, beholding toweepe and make such lamentations; found a fierce conflict in histhoughts, betweene content and pitty. it did not a little joy andcontent him, that the revenge which he so earnestly desired tocompasse, was now by him so effectually inflicted. and yet (in meerehumanity) pitty provoked him, to commisserate the ladies distressedcondition: but clemency being over-weake to withstand his rigor,thus he replied. madam helena, if mine entreaties (which, to speaketruly, i never knew how to steepe in tears, nor wrap up my words insugar candie, so cuningly as you women know how to do) could haveprevailed, that miserable night, when i was well-neere frozen to deathwith cold, and meerly buried with snow in your court, not havinganie place of rescue or shelter; your complaints would now the moreeasily over-rule me. but if your honor in estimation, bee now moreprecious to you then heretofore, and it seemeth so offensive tostand there naked: convert your perswasions and prayers to him, inwhose armes you were that night imbraced, both of your triumphing inmy misery, when poor i, trotted about your court, with the teethquivering in my head, and beating mine armes about my body, finding nocompassion in him, or you. let him bring thee thy garments, let himcome helpe thee down with the ladder, and let him have the care ofthine honour, on whom thou hast bene so prodigall heretofore inbestowing it, and now hast unwomanly throwne thy selfe in perill,onely for the maintenance of thine immodest desires.
why dost thou not call on him to come helpe thee? to whom doeth itmore belong, then to him? for thou art his and he thine. why thenshold any other but he help thee in this distresse? call him (foole asthou art) and try, if the love he beareth thee, and thy bestunderstanding joyned with his, can deliver thee out of my sottishdetaining thee. i have not forgot, that when you both made a pastimeof my misery, thou didst demand of him, which seemed greatest in hisopinion, either my sottish simplicity, or the love thou barest him.i am not now so liberall or courteous, to desire that of thee, whichthou wouldst not grant, if i did request it: no, no, reserve thosenight favours for thy amorous friend, if thou dost escape hencealive to see him againe. as for my selfe, i leave thee freely to hisuse and service: because i have sufficiently payde for a womansfalshood, and wisemen take such warning, that they scorne to bee twicedeceived, and by one woman. proceed on stil in thy flatteringperswasions, terming me to be a gentleman and a scholler, thereby towin such favor from me, that i should think thy villany toward me,to be already sufficiently punished. no, treacherous helena, thyblandishments cannot now hoodwink the eies of my understanding, aswhen thou didst out-reach me with thy disloyall promises andprotestations. and let me now tell thee plainely, that all the while icontinued in the universitie of paris, i never attained unto soperfect an understanding of my selfe, as in that one miserable nightthou diddest enstruct mee. but admit, that i were enclined unto amercifull and compassionate minde, yet thou art none of them, on whomemilde and gracious mercy should any way declare her effects. for,the end of pennance among savage beasts, such as thou art, andlikewise of due vengeance, ought to be death: whereas among men, itshould suffice according to thine owne saying. wherefore, in regardthat i am neither an eagle, nor thou a dove, but rather a mostvenomous serpent: i purpose with my utmost hatred, and as an ancientenemy to all such as thou art, to make my revenge famous on thee.
i am not ignorant, that whatsoever i have already done unto thee,cannot properly be termed revenge, but rather chastisement; becauserevenge ought alwayes to exceede the offence, which (as yet) i amfarre enough from. for, if i did intend to revenge my wrongs, andremembred thy monstrous cruelty to me: thy life, if i tooke it fromthee, and an hundred more such as thy selfe, were farreinsufficient, because in killing thee, i should kill but a vileinhumane beast, yea, one that deserved not the name of a woman. and,to speake truely, art thou any more, or better (setting aside thyborrowed haire, and painted beauty, which in few yeares will leavethee wrinkled and deformed) then the basest beggarly chamber-stuffethat can bee? yet thou soughtest the death of a gentleman and scholleras (in scorne) not long since, thou didst terme me: whose life mayhereafter be more beneficiall unto the world, then millions of such asthou art, to live in the like multiplicity of ages. therefore, if thisanguish be sensible to thee, learne what it is to mocke men ofapprehension, and (amongst them especially) such as are schollers:to prevent thy falling hereafter into the like extremity, if it be thygood lucke to escape out of this.
it appeareth to me, that thou art verie desirous to come downehither on the ground; the best counsell that i can give thee, is toleape downe headlong, that by breaking thy necke (if thy fortune be sofaire) thy life and lothsome qualities ending together, i may sitand smile at thy deserved destruction. i have no other comfort to givethee, but only to boast my happinesse, in teaching thee the way toascend that tower, and in thy descending downe (even by what means thywit can best devise) make a mockery of me, and say thou hast learnedmore, then all my schollership could instruct thee.
all the while as reniero uttered these speeches, the miserablelady sighed and wept very grievously, the time running on, and thesunne ascending higher and higher; but when she heard him silent, thusshe answered. unkinde and cruell man, if that wretched night was sogreevous to thee, and mine offence appeared so great, as neither myyouth, beautie, teares, and humble intercessions, are able to deriveany mercy from thee; yet let the last consideration moove thee to someremorse: namely that i reposed new confidence in thee (when i hadlittle or no reason at all to trust thee) and discovered theintegritie of my soule unto thee, whereby thou didst compasse themeanes, to punish me thus deservedly for my sinne. for, if i had notreposed confidence in thee, thou couldst not (in this maner) havewrought revenge on me, which although thou didst earnestly covet,yet my rash credulitie was thy onely helpe. asswage then thineanger, and graciously pardon me, wherein if thou wilt be somercifull to me, and free me from this fatall tower: i do heerefaithfully promise thee, to forsake my most false and disloyallfriend, electing thee as my lord and constant love for ever.
moreover, although thou condemnest my beauty greatly, esteeming itas a trifle, momentary, and of slender continuance; yet, such as it is(being comparable with any other womans whatsoever) i am not soignorant, that were there no other reason to induce liking thereof:yet men in the vigour of their youth (as i am sure you think yourselfe not aged) do hold it for an especiall delight, ordained bynature for them to admire and honour. and notwithstanding all thycruelty extended to mee, yet i cannot be perswaded, that thou art soflinty or ironhearted, as to desire my miserable death, by castingmy selfe headlong downe (like a desperate madde woman) before thyface, so to destroy that beuty, which (if thy letters lyed not) wasonce so highly pleasing in thine eyes. take pitty then on mee forcharities sake, because the sunne beginneth to heate extreamely: andas over-much colde (that unhappy night) was mine offence, so let notover-violent warmth be now my utter ruine and death.
the scholler, who (onely to delight himselfe) maintained this longdiscoursing with her, returned her this answere. madame, you did notrepose such confidence in me, for any good will or afrection in youtowards me, but in hope of recovering him whom you had lost; whereinyou merit not a jot of favour, but rather the more sharpe and severeinfliction. and whereas you inferre, that your over-rash credulity,gave the onely meanes to my revenge: alas! therein you deceive yourselfe; for i have a thousand crochets working continually in my brain,whereby to entrap a wiser creature then a woman, yet veiled allunder the cunning cloake of love, but sauced with the bitter wormewoodof hate. so that, had not this hapned as now it doth, of necessity youmust have falne into another: but, as it hath pleased my happy starsto favour mee therein, none could proove more to your eternallscandall and disgrace, then this of your owne devising; which i madechoise of, not in regard of any ease to you, but onely to content myselfe.
but if all other devises els had failed, my pen was and is myprevayling champion, where-with i would have written such and somany strange matters, concerning you in your very dearestreputation; that you should have curst the houre of your conception,and wisht your birth had bin abortive. the powers of the pen are toomany and mighty, wherof such weake wits as have made no experience,are the lesse able to use any relation. i sweare to you lady, by mybest hopes, that this revenge which (perhappes) you esteeme greatand dishonourable, is no way compareable to the wounding lines of apenne, which can carracter downe so infinite infamies (yet none butguilty and true taxations) as will make your owne hands immediateinstruments, to teare the eyes from forth your head, and so bequeathyour after dayes unto perpetuall darkenesse.
now, concerning your lost lover, for whose sake you suffer thisunexpected pennance; although your choise hath proved but bad, yetstill continue your affection to him: in regard that i have anotherladie and mistresse, of higher and greater desert then you, and towhome i will continue for ever constant. and whereas you thinke, thewarme beames of the sunne, will be too hot and scorching for your nicebodie to endure: remember the extreame cold which you caused mee tofeele, and if you can intermixe some part of that cold with thepresent heat, i dare assure you, the sun (in his highest heate) willbe far more temperate for your feeling.
the disconsolate lady perceiving, that the schollers wordes savouredof no mercy, but rather as coveting her desperate ending; with theteares streaming downe her cheekes, thus she replied. wel sir,seeing there is no matter of worth in me, whereby to derive anycompassion from you: yet for that ladies sake, whom you have electedworthy to enjoy your love, and so farre excelleth mee in wisedome;vouchsafe to pardon mee, and suffer my garments to be brought me,wherewith to cover my nakednesse, and so to descend downe from thistower, if it may stand with your gentle nature to admit it.
now beganne reniero to laughe very heartily, and perceiving howswiftly the day ran on in his course, he saide unto her. beleeve memadame helena, you have so conjured me by mine endeered ladie andmistresse, that i am no longer able to deny you; wherefore, tell mewhere your garments are, and i will bring them to you, that you maycome downe from the turret. she beleeving his promise, tolde him whereshe had hid them, and reniero departing from the tower, commandedhis servant, not to stirre thence: but to abide still so neere it,as none might get entrance there till his returning. which chargewas no sooner given to his man, but hee went to the house of a neereneighboring friend, where he dined well, and afterward laid himdowne to sleepe.
in the meane while, madame helena remaining still on the tower,began to comfort her selfe with a little vaine hope, yet sighing andweeping incessantly, seating her selfe so well as shee could, whereany small shelter might yeelde the least shade, in expectation ofthe schollers returning: one while weeping, then againe hoping, butmost of all despairing, by his so long tarrying away with hergarments; so that beeing over-wearied with anguish and longwatching, she fell into a little slumbering. but the sunne was soextreamly hot, the houre of noone being already past, that it meerlyparched her delicate body, and burnt her bare head so violently: asnot onely it seared all the flesh it touched; but also cleft andchinkt it strangely, beside blisters and other painfull scorchingsin the flesh which hindred her sleeping, to help her self (by allpossible means) waking. and the turret being covered with lead, gavethe greater addition to her torment; for, as she removed from oneplace to another, it yeelded no mitigation to the burning heate, butparched and wrinkled the flesh extraordinarily, even as when a pieceof parchment is throwne into the fire, and recovered out againe, cannever be extended to his former forme.
moreover, she was so grievously payned with the head-ake, as itseemed to split in a thousand pieces, whereat there needed no greatthe lead of the turret being so exceedingly hot, that it affoorded notthe least defence against it, or any repose to qualifie the torment:but drove her still from one place to another, in hope of ease, butnone was there to be found.
nor was there any winde at all stirring, whereby to asswage thesunnes violent scalding, or keepe away huge swarmes of waspes,hornets, and terrible byting flyes, which vexed her extreamely,feeding on those parts of her body, that were rifte and chinkt, likecrannies in a mortered wall, and pained her like so many points ofpricking needles, labouring still with her hands to beate them away,but yet they fastned on one place or other, and afflicted her ingrievous manner, causing her to curse her owne life, hir amorousfriend, but (most of all) the scholler, that promised to bring hergarments, and as yet returned not. now began she to gaze upon everyside about her, to espy some labouring husbandmen in the fields, towhom she might call or cry out for helpe, not fearing to discoverher desperate condition: but fortune therein also was adverse toher, because the heats extreamity, had driven all the village out ofthe fields, causing them to feede their cattle about theyr ownehouses, or in remote and shadie valleyes: so that shee could see noother creatures to comfort her, but swannes swimming in the river ofarno, and wishing her selfe there a thousand times with them, for tocoole the extreamity of her thirst, which so much the moreencreased, onely by the sight thereof, and utterly disabled ofhaving any.
she saw beside in many places about her, goodly woods, fayre cooleshades, and country houses here and there dispersed; which added thegreater violence to hir affliction, that her desires (in all these)could no way be accomplished. what shall i say more concerning thisdisastrous lady? the parching beames of the sunne above her, thescalding heat of the lead beneath her, the hornets and flyes everieway stinging her, had made such an alteration of her beautifull bodie:that, as it checkt and controlled the precedent nights darkenesse,it was now so metamorphosed with rednesse, yea, and blood issuingforth in infinite places, as she seemed (almost) loathsome to lookeon, continuing still in this agonie of torment, quite voyde of allhope, and rather expecting death, then any other comfort.
reniero, when some three houres of the afternoone were overpast,awaked from sleeping: and remembring madame helena, he went to seein what estate she was; as also to send his servant unto dinner,because he had fasted all that day. she perceyving his arrivall, beingaltogether weake, faint, and wonderously over-wearied, she crept onher knees to a corner of the turret, and calling to him, spake in thismanner. reniero, thy revenge exceedeth al manhoode and respect: for,if thou wast almost frozen in my court, thou hast roasted me all daylong on this tower, yea, meerly broyled my poore naked bodie, besidestarving mee thorough want of food and drinke. be now then somercifull (for manhoods sake) as to come uppe hither, and inflict thaton me, which mine owne hands are not strong enough to do, i meanethe ending of my loathed and wearisome life, for i desire it beyondall comfort else, and i shall honour thee in the performance of it. ifthou deny me this gracious favour; at least send me uppe a glasse ofwater, onely to moisten my mouth, which my teares (being all meerlydried up) are not able to doe, so extreame is the violence of thesunnes burning heate.
well perceived the scholler, by the weaknesse of her voyce, andscorching of her body by the suns parching beames, that shee wasbrought now to great extremity: which sight, as also her humbleintercession, began to touch him with some compassion, nevertheles,thus he replied. wicked woman, my hands shal be no means of thy death,but make use of thine owne, if thou be so desirous to have it: andas much water shalt thou get of me to asswage thy thirst, as thougavest me fire to comfort my freezing, when thou wast in the luxuriousheat of thy immodest desires, and i wel-neere frozen to death withextremity of cold. pray that the evening may raine downe rosewateron thee, because that in the river of arno is not good enough forthee: for as little pitty doe i take on thee now, as thou didst extendcompassion to me then.
miserable woman that i am, answered helena; why did the heavensbestow beautie on mee, which others have admired and honoured, and yet(by thee) is utterly despised? more cruell art thou then any savagebeast; thus to vexe and torment mee in such mercilesse manner. whatgreater extreamity couldst thou inflict on me, if i had bin thedestruction of all thy kindred, and lefte no one man living of thyrace? i am verily perswaded, that more cruelty cannot be usedagainst a traitor, who was the subversion of an whole cittie, thenthis tyranny of thine, roasting me thus in the beames of the sun,and suffering my body to be devoured with flies, without so small amercie, as to give mee a little coole water, which murtherers arepermitted to have, being condemned by justice, and led to execution:yea wine also, if they request it.
but, seeing thou art so constant in thy pernitious resolve, asneither thine owne good nature, nor this lamentable sufferance inme, are able to alter thee: i will prepare my self for deathpatiently, to the end, that heaven may be mercifull to my soul, andreward thee justly, according to thy cruelty. which words being ended,she withdrew her selfe towards the middest of the tarras, despairingof escaping (with life)
from the heates violence; and not once onely, but infinite timesbeside (among her other grievous extreamities) she was ready to dyewith drought, bemoaning incessantly her dolorous condition.
by this time the day was well neere spent, and night beganne tohasten on apace: when the scholler (immagining that he afflicted hersufficiently) tooke her garments, and wrapping them up in his manscloake, went thence to the ladies house, where he found ancilla thewaiting-woman sitting at the doore, sad and disconsolate for herladies long absence, to whom thus he spake. how now ancilla? whereis thy lady and mistris? alas sir (quoth she) i know not. i thoughtthis morning to have found her in her bed, as usually i was wont todo, and where i left her yesternight at our parting: but there she wasnot, nor in any place else of my knowledge, neyther can i imagine whatis become of her, which is to me no meane discomfort.
but can you (sir) say any thing of her? ancilla, said he, i wouldthou hadst bin in her company, and at the same place where now she is,that some punishment for thy fault might have falne uppon thee, asalready it hath done on her. but beleeve it assuredly, that thou shaltnot freely escape from my fingers, till i have justly paide thee forthy paines, to teach thee to abuse any gentleman, as thou didst me.
having thus spoken, hee called to his servant, saying. give herthe garments, and bid her go looke her lady, if she will. theservingman fulfilled his masters command, and ancilla havingreceyved her ladies cloaths, knowing them perfectly, and remembring(withall) what had bin said: she waxed very doubtfull, least theyhad slaine her, hardly refraining from exclaiming on them, but thatgreefe and heavie weeping overcame her; so that uppon the schollersdeparting, she ranne in all hast with the garments towardes the tower.
upon this fatall and unfortunate day to madame helena, it chanced,that a clowne or countrey peazant belonging to her farme or dairyhouse, having two of his young heyfers wandred astray, and helabouring in diligent search to finde them: within a while after theschollers departure, came to seeke them in woods about the tower, and,notwithstanding all his crying and calling for his beasts, yet heheard the ladies greevous moanes and lamentations. wherefore, he cryedout so lowd as he could, saying: who is it that mourneth so aloft onthe tower? full well she knew the voyce of her peazant, andtherefore called unto him, and sayd in this maner.
go (quoth she) i pray thee for my waiting-woman ancilla, and bid hermake some meanes to come up hither to me. the clowne knowing his lady,sayde. how now madame? who hath carried you up there so high? yourwoman ancilla hath sought for you all this day, yet no one couldever have immagined you to bee there. so looking about him, heespyed the two sides of the ladder, which the scholler had pulled insunder; as also the steppes, which he had scattered thereabout;placing them in due order againe as they should bee, and bindingthem fast with withies and willowes.
by this time ancilla was come thither, who so soone as shee wasentred into the tower, could not refrain from teares and complaints,beating her hands each against other, and crying out. madam, dearelady and mistresse! alas, wher are you? so soone as she heard thetongue of ancilla, she replyed (so well as she could) saying: ah mysweet woman, i am heere aloft uppon the tarras; weepe not, neythermake any noyse, but quickely bring me some of my garments. when sheeheard her answer in such comfortable maner, she mounted up the ladder,which the peazant had made very firme and strong, holding it fastfor her safer ascending; by which meanes she went up on the tarras.beholding her ladie in so strange a condition, resembling no humanebody, but rather the trunke of a tree halfe burned, lying flat onher face, naked, scorched and strangely deformed: shee beganne toteare the lockes of her owne hayre, raving and raging in aspittifull manner, as if her ladie had beene quite dead. which stormingtempest, madame helena soone pacified, entreating her to usesilence, and helpe to put on her garments.
having understood by her, that no one knew of her being there, butsuch as brought her cloathes, and the poore peazant, attending therestill to do her any service: shee became the better comforted,entreating them by all meanes, that it might bee concealed from anyfurther discovery, which was on eyther side, most faithfullieprotested.
the poore clowne holpe to beare downe his lady uppon his backe,because the ladder stood not conveniently enough for her descending,neither were her limbes plyable for her owne use, by reason of theirrifts and smarting. ancilla following after, and being more respectiveof her lady, then her owne security in descending, missing the step inthe midst of the ladder, fell downe to the ground, and quite brake herlegge in the fall, the paine whereof was so greevous to her, thatshe cried and roared extraordinarily, even like a lyon in the desert.
when the clowne had set his lady safe on a faire green banke, hereturned to see what the waiting woman ayled, and finding her leg tobe quite broken: he caried her also to the same banke, and thereseated her by her lady: who perceiving what a mischance had hapned,and she (from whom she expected her onely best helpe) to bee now infar greater necessity her selfe: shee lamented exceedingly,complaining on fortunes cruel malice toward her, in thus heaping onemisery upon another, and never ceasing to torment her, especiallynow in the conclusion of all, and when shee thought all futureperils to be past.
now was the sun upon his setting, when the poore honest country-man,because darke night should not overtake them, conducted the ladyhome to his owne house: and gaining the assistance of his two brethrenand wife, setting the waiting-woman in a chaire, thither theybrought her in like manner. and questionles, there wanted no diligenceand comfortable language, to pacifie the ladyes continualllamentations. the good wife, led the lady into hir own poorelodging, where (such cates as they had to feede on) lovingly she setbefore her: conveying her afterward into her owne bed, and taking suchgood order, that ancilla was carried in the night time to florence, toprevent all further ensuing danger, by reason of her legs breaking.
madame helena, to colour this misfortune of her owne: as also thegreat mishap of her woman: forged an artificiall and cunning tale,to give some formall apparance of hir being in the tower, perswadingthe poore simple country people, that in a straunge accident ofthunder and lightning, and by the illusions of wicked spirits, allthis adventure hapned to her. then physitians were sent for; who,not without much anguish and affliction to the ladie (by reason of herfleshes flaying off, with the medicines and emplaysters applyed to thebody) was glad to suffer whatsoever- they did, beside falling into avery dangerous feaver; out of which she was not recovered in a longwhile after, but continued in daily dispayre of her life; beside otheraccidents hapning in her time of physicke, utterly unavoydable in suchextreamities: and hardly had ancilla her legge cured.
by this unexpected pennance imposed on madame helena, she utterlyforgot her amorous friend; and (from thence forward) carefully kepther selfe from fond loves allurements, and such scornfull behaviour,wherein she was most disorderly faulty. and reniero the scholler,understanding that ancilla had broken her leg, r , which he reputed asa punishment sufficient for her, held himselfe satisfyed, becauseneither the mistresse nor her maide, could now make any great boast,of his nights hard entertainment, and so concealed all matters else.
thus a wanton-headed lady, could finde no other subject to worke hermocking folly on, but a learned scholler, of whom shee made no morerespect, then any other ordinary man. never remembring, that suchmen are expert (i cannot say all, but the greater part of them) tohelpe the frenzie of foolish ladies, that must injoy their loosedesires, by negromancy, and the divelles meanes. let it therefore(faire ladies) be my loving admonition to you, to detest all unwomanlymocking and scorning, but more especiallie to schollers.
the eight day, the eight novell
wherein is approved, that he which offereth shame and disgrace to
his neighbour; may receive the like injury (if
not in worse manner) by the same man
two neere dwelling neighbours, the one beeing named spinelocciotavena, and the other zeppa di mino, frequenting each others companydaily. together; spinelloccio cuckolded his friend and neighbour.which happening to the knowledge of zeppa, he prevailed so well withthe wife of spinelloccio, that he being lockt up in a chest, herevenged his wrong at that instant, so that neyther of them complainedof his misfortune.
greevous, and full of compassion, appeared the hard fortunes ofmadame helena to be, having much descontented, and (well-neere)wearied all the ladies in hearing them recounted. but because theywere very justly inflicted upon her, and according as (in equity) sheehad deserved, they were the more moderate in their commisseration:howbeit, they reputed the scholler not onely over-obstinate, butalso too strict, rigorous and severe. wherefore, when madamepampinea had finished hir novell, the queene gave command to madamefiammetta, that she should follow next with her discourse; wheretoshee shewing obedience, thus beganne.
because it appeareth in my judgement (faire ladyes) that theschollers cruelty hath much displeased you, making you moremelancholly then this time requireth: i holde it therefore veryconvenient, that your contristed spirits should be chearfully revived,with matter more pleasing and delightfull. and therefore, i mean toreport a novell of a certaine man, who too an injury done him, in muchmilder manner, and revenged his wrong more moderately, then thefurious incensed scholler did. whereby you may comprehend, that itis sufficient for any man, and so he ought to esteeme it, to serveanother with the same sawce, which the offending party caused himfirst to taste of: without coveting any stricter revenge, then agreethwith the quality of the injury received.
know then (gracious assembly) that, as have heretofore heard,there lived not long since in sienna, two young men, of honestparentage and equall condition, neither of the best, nor yet themeanest calling in the city: the one being named spinellocciotavena, and the other tearmed zeppa di mino, their houses neighbouringtogether in the streete camollia. seldome the one walked abroadewithout the others company, and their houses allowed equall welcome tothem both; so that by outward demonstrations, and inward mutuallaffection, as far as humane capacity had power to extend, they livedand loved like two brethren, they both beeing wealthy, and marriedunto two beautifull women.
it came to passe, that spinelloccio, by often resorting to the houseof zeppa, as well in his absence, as when he abode at home; beganne toglance amorous looks on zeppaes wife, and pursued his unneighbourlypurpose in such sort: that hee being the stronger perswader, and she(belike) too credulous in beleeving, or else overfeeble inresisting; from private imparlance, they fell to action; and continuedtheir close fight a long while together, unseene and withoutsuspition, no doubt to their equall joy and contentment.but, whether as a just punishment, for breaking so loving a league offriendship and neighbour-hood, or rather a fatall infliction, evermoreattending on the closest cuckoldry, their felicity still continuing inthis kinde: it fortuned on a day, zeppa abiding within doors, contraryto the knowledge of his wife, spinelloccio came to enquire for him,and she answering (as she verily supposed) that he was gon abroad:uppe they went both together into the hall, and no bodie being thereto hinder what they intended, they fell to their wonted recreationwithout any feare, kissing and embracing as lovers use to do.
zeppa seeing all this, spake not one word, neither made any noise atall; but kept himselfe closely hidden, to observe the yssue of thisamorous conflict. to be briefe, he saw spinelloccio goe with hiswife into the chamber, and make the doore fast after them, whereathe could have beene angry, which he held to be no part of truewisedome. for he knew well enough, that to make an out crie in thiscase, or otherwise to reveale this kinde of injury, it could no waymake it lesse, but rather give a greater addition of shame andscandall: he thought this no course for him to take; wiserconsiderations entred his braine, to have this wrong fully revenged,yet with such a discreete and orderly carriage, as no neighboursknowledge should by any meanes apprehend it, or the least sig ofdiscontent in himselfe blabbe it, because they were two dangerousevils.
many notable courses whee.ed about his conceit, every onepromising fairely, and ministring meanes of formall apparance, yet one(above the rest) wonne his absolute allowance, which he intended toprosecute as best he might. in which resolution, he kept still veryclose, so long as spinelloccio was with his wife; but hee beinggone, he went into the chamber, where he found his wife, amendingthe forme of her head attyre, which spinelloccio had put into adisordred fashion. wife (quoth be) what art thou doing? why? do younot see husband? answered she. yes that i do wife, replied zeppa,and something else happened to my sight, which i could wish that i hadnot seene. rougher language growing betweene them, of his avouching,and her as stout denying, with defending her cause over-weakely,against the manifest proofes both of eye and eare: at last she fell onher knees before him, weeping incessantly, and no excuses nowavailing, she confest her long acquaintance with spinelloccio, andmost humbly entreated him to forgive her. uppon the which penitentconfession and submission, zeppa thus answered.
wife, if inward contrition be answerable to thy outward seemingsorrow, then i make no doubt, but faithfully thou dost acknowledgethine owne evill dooing: for which, if thou expectest pardon of me;determine then to fulfill effectually, such a busines as i mustenjoyne, and thou performe. i command thee to tell spinelloccio,that to morrow morning, about nine of the clocke, we being both abroadwalking, he must finde some apt occasion to leave my company, and thencome hither to visit thee. when he is here, sodainly will i returnehome, and upon thy hearing of my entraunce: to save his ownecredite, and thee from detection, thou shalt require him to enter thischest, untill such time as i am gone forth againe; which he doing, forboth your safeties, so soon as he is in the chest, take the key andlocke him up fast. when thou hast effected this, then shall i acquaintthee with the rest remaining, which also must be done by thee, withoutdread of the least harme to him or thee, because there is no maliciousmeaning in me, but such as (i am perswaded) thou canst not justlymislike. the wife, to make some satisfaction for her offence committedpromised that she would performe it, and so she did.
on the morrow morning, the houre of nine being come, when zeppaand spinelloccio were walking abroad together, spinelloccio remembringhis promise unto his mistresse, and the clocke telling him theappointed houre, hee saide to zeppa. i am to dine this day with anespeciall friend of mine, who i would be loath should tarry for mycomming; and therefore holde my departure excused. how now? answeredzeppa, the time for dinner is yet farre enough off, wherefore thenshould we part so soone? yea but zeppa, replied spinelloccio, wee haveweighty matters to confer on before dinner, which will require threehoures space at the least, and therefore it behoveth me to respect duetime.
spinelloccio being departed from zeppa (who followed faire andsoftly after him)
being come to the house, and kindly welcommed by the wife: they wereno sooner gone up the staires, and entering in at the chamber doore;but the woman heard her husband cough, and also his comming up thestaires. alas deare spinelloccio (quoth she) what shall we do? myhusband is comming uppe, and we shall be both taken tardie, stepinto this chest, lye downe there and stirre not, till i have senthim forth againe, which shall be within a very short while.spinelloccio was not a little joyfull for her good advice; downe inthe chest lay he, and she lockt him in: by which time zeppa was entredthe chamber. where are you wife? said he, (speaking so loud, as hee inthe chest might heare him) what, is it time to go to dinner? it willbe anon sir, answered she, as yet it is overearly but seeing you arecome, the more hast shall be made, and every thing will be readyquickly.
zeppa, sitting downe upon the chest, wherein spinelloccio lay nota little affrighted, speaking stil aloud, as formerly he did: comehither wife (quoth he) how shall we do for some good companie todine with us? mine honest kinde neighbour spinelloccio is not at home,because he dineth forth to day with a deare friend of his, by whichmeanes, his wife is left at home alone: give her a call out at ourwindow, and desire her to come dine with us: for we two can make nomerry musicke, except some more come to make up the consort.
his wife being very timorous, yet diligent to doe whatsoever hecommanded, so prevailed with the wife of spinelloccio: that she cameto them quickely, and so much the rather, because her husband dinedabroad. shee being come up into the chamber, zeppa gave her most kindeentertainment, taking her gently by the hand, and winking on his wife,that she should betake her selfe to the kitchin, to see dinnerspeedily prepared, while he sat conversing with his neighbour in thechamber.
his wife being gone, he shut the doore after her; which the new-comeneighbour perceyving, she sayde. our blessed lady defend me. zeppa,what is your meaning in this? have you caused me to come hither tothis intent? is this the love you beare to spinelloccio, and yourprofessed loyalty in friendshippe? zeppa, seating her downe on thechest, wherein her husband was inclosed, entreating her patience, thusbegan. kinde and loving neighbor, before you adventure too farre inanger, vouchsafe to heare what i shall tell you.
i have loved, and still doe love, spinelloccio as my brother, butyesterday (albeit he knoweth it not) i found, the honest trust ireposed in him, deserved no other, or better recompence, but even tobe bold with my wife, in the selfesame manner as i am, and as heeought to do with none but you. now, in regard of the love which ibeare him, i intend to be no otherwise revenged on him, but in thesame kinde as the offence was committed. he hath bin more thenfamiliar with my wife. i must borrow the selfe-same courtesie ofyou, which in equity you cannot deny mee, weighing the wrong youhave sustained by my wife. our injuries are alike, in your husbandto me, and in my wife to you: let then their punishment and ours bealike also; as they, so we; for in this case there can be no justerrevenge.the woman hearing this, and perceiving the manifolde confirmationsthereof, protested (on solemne oath) by zeppa; hir beliefe grewsetled, and thus she answered. my loving neighbor zeppa, seeing thiskinde of revenge is (in meere justice) imposed on mee, and ordained asa due scourge, as well to the breach of friendship andneighbourhood, as abuse of his true and loyall wife: i am the morewilling to consent: alwaies provided, that it be no imbarrement oflove betweene your wife and mee, albeit i have good reason to alledge,that she began the quarrell first: and what i do is but to right mywrong, as any other woman of spirit would do: afterwards, we may themore pardon one another. for breach more easi of peace (answeredzeppa) between my wife and you, take my honest word for yourwarrant. moreover, in requitall of this favour to mee, i willbestowe a deare and precious jewell on you, excelling all the restwhich you have beside.
in delivering these words, he sweetly kissed and embraced her, asshe sat on the chest wherein her husband lay: now, what they didelse beside, in recompence of the wrong received, i leave to yourimagination, as rather deserving silence, then immodest blabbing.spinelloccio, being all this while in the chest, hearing easily allthe words which zeppa had uttered, the answer of his wife, as alsowhat musicke they made over his head: you may guesse in what a case hewas, his heart being ready to split with rage, and, but that hee stoodin feare of zeppa, he would have railde and exclaimed on his wife,as thus hee lay shut up in the chest. but entering into betterconsideration, that so great al injury was first begun by himselfe,and zeppa did no more, then in reason and equity he might well do(having evermore carried himselfe like a kinde neighbour and frendtowards him, without the least offer of distaste) he faithfullyresolved, to be a firmer friend to zeppa then formerly hee had bin, ifit might be embraced and accepted.
delights and pleasures, be they never so long in contenting andcontinuance, yet they come to a period and conclusion at last: sozeppa, having ended his amorous combate, and over the head of hisperfidious friend, thought himselfe sufficiently revenged. but now, inconsideration of a further promise made on the bargaine;spinelloccioes wife challengeth the jewel, then which kind ofrecompence, nothing can be more welcom to women. heereupon, zeppacalling for his owne wife, commanded her to open the chest; which sheedid, and he merrily smiling, saide. well wife, you have given mee acake insted of bread, and you shal lose nothing for your labour. sospinelloccio comming forth of the chest, it requireth a better wittethen mine, to tell you, which of them stood most confounded withshame, either spinelloccio seeing zeppa, and knowing well enoughwhat he had done: or the woman beholding her husband, who easily heardall their familiar conference, and the action thereupon sodeservedly performed.
see neighbour, is not this your dearest jewell? having kept itawhile in my wives custody; according to my promise, here i deliver ityou. spinellcccio being glad of his deliverance out of the chest,albeit not a little ashamed of himselfe; without using manyimpertinent words saide. zeppa, our wrongs are equally requited oneach other, and therefore i allow thy former speeches to my wife, thatthou wast my friend, as i am the like to thee, and so i pray theelet us still continue. for nothing else is now to bee divided betweeneus, seeing we have shared alike in our wives, which none knowing butour selves, let it be as closely kept to our selves. zeppa was welpleased with the motion, and so all foure dined lovingly together,without any variance or discontentment. and thence forward, each ofthe women had two husbands, as either husband enjoyed two wives,without further contention or debate.
the eight day, the ninth novell
wherein is approved, that titles of honour, learning, and
dignity, are not alwayes bestowne on the wisest men
maestro simone, an ydle-headed doctor of physicke, was throwne bybruno and buffalmaco, into a common leystall of filth: the physitianfondly beleeving, that (in the night time) he should bee made one of anew created company, who usually went to see wonders at corsica; andthere in the leystall they left him.
after that the ladies had a while considered, on the communicationbetweene the two wives of sienna, and the falshood in friendship oftheir husbands: the queene, who was the last to recount her novell,without offering injurie to dioneus, began to speake thus.
the reward for a precedent wrong committed, which zeppa retortedupon spinelloccio, was answerable to his desert, and no more thenequity required, in which respect, i am of opinion, that such menought not to be over-sharpely reproved, as do injurie to him, whoseeketh for it, and justly should have it, althogh madam pampinea (notlong since) avouched the contrary.
now, it evidently appeareth, that spinelloccio well deserved whatwas done to him, and i purpose to speake of another, who needs wouldseeke after his owne disgrace.
the rather to confirme my former speeches, that they which beguilesuch wilfull foolish men; are not to bee blamed, but rather commended.and he unto whom the shame was done, was a physitian, which camefrom bologna to florence; and returned thither againe like unto abeast, notoriously baffulled and disgraced.
it is a matter well knowne- to us, and (almost) observed day by day,that divers of our citizens, when they returne from their studyingat bologna: one becommeth an advocate, another a physitian, and athird a notarie, with long and large gowns, some of scarlet, and hoodsfurred with minever, beside divers other great apparances,succeeding effectually daily in their severall kinds. among whom,there returned (not long since) thence, one master. simon da villa,more rich in possessions left him by his parents, then anieknowledge thereto obtained: yet cloathed in scarlet, with hisminiver hood, and styled a doctor of physicke, which title hee onelybestowed on himselfe, and tooke a goodly house for his dwelling, inthe street which wee commonly call la via del cocomero. this masterdoctor simon, being thus newly come thither, among other notablequalities in him, had one more especial then any of the rest,namely, to know the names and conditions of such persons, as dailypassed by his doore, and what professions they were of, wherby anylikelyhood might be gathered of needing his helpe, and being hispatients, observing them all with very vigilant care.
but, among all the rest by him thus warily noted, he most observedtwo painters, of whom we have heeretofore twice discoursed, brunoand buffalmaco, who walked continually together, and were his neeredwelling neighbors. the matter which most of al he noted in them, was;that they lived merrily, and with much lesse care, then any else inthe cittie beside, and verily they did so in deede. wherefore, hedemanded of divers persons, who had good understanding of them both,of what estate and condition they were. and hearing by every one, thatthey were but poore men and painters: he greatly mervailed, how itcould be possible for them, that they should live so jocondly, andin such poverty. it was related to him further beside, that theywere men of a quicke and ingenious apprehension, whereby heepolitikely imagined, that theyr poore condition could not so wellmaintaine them; without some courses else, albeit not publiquelyknowne unto men, yet redounding to their great commoditie and profite.in which regard, he grew exceeding desirous, by what meanes he mightbecome acquainted, and grow into familiarity with them both, or any ofthem, at the least: wherein (at the length) he prevailed, and brunoproved to be the man.
now bruno plainly perceiving (within a short while of this new begunacquaintance) that the physitian was a loggerhead, and meerely nobetter then a gregorian animall: he beganne to have much goodpastime with him, by telling him strange and incredible tales, such asnone but a coxcombe would give credit too; yet they delighted doctordunce extraordinarily, and brunoes familiarity was so highlypleasing to him, that he was a daily guest at dinner and supper withhim, and hee was not meanly proud of enjoying his company. one day, asthey sate in familiar conference together, he told bruno that hewondred not a little at him and buffalmaco, they being both so poorepeople, yet lived far more jovially then lords, and thereforedesired to understand, by what secret meanes they compassed suchmirthful maintenance. bruno, hearing the doctors demaund, andperceiving that it savoured more of the foole, then any the very leasttaste of wisedome: smiled unto himselfe, and determined to returne himsuch an answere, as might be fitting for his folly, whereupon, thus hereplied.
beleeve me master doctor, i would not impart to many people, whatprivate helpes we have for our maintenance: but yet i dare boldlyacquaint you therewith, in regard you are one of our most intimatefriends, and of such secrecie, as (i know) you will not reveale itto any. true it is, that mine honest neighbor and my selfe, do leadeour lives in such merry manner as you see, and better then all theworld is aware of, for i cannot imagine you to bee so ignorant, butare certainly perswaded: that if we had no better means, then ourpoore manuall trade and profession; we might sit at home with breadand water, and be nothing so lively spirited as wee are. yet sir, iwould not have you to conceive, that wee do eyther rob or steale, oruse any other unlawfull courses: onely we travayle to corsica, fromwhence we bring (without the least prejudice to anie other) all thingswe stand in need of, or whatsoever wee can desire. thus do wemaintaine our selves well and honestly, and live in this mirthfulldisposition.
master doctor hearing this discourse, and beleeving it constantly,without any further instruction or intelligence: became possessed withverie much admiration, and had the most earnest desire in the world,to know what this travailing to corsica might meane: entreatingbruno with very great instances, to tell him what it was, and mademany protestations never to disclose it to anie one. how now masterdoctor? answered bruno, what a strange motion do you make to mee? itis too great a secret, which you desire to know, yea, a matter of mineowne ruine, and an utter expulsion out of this worlde, withcondemnation into the mouth of lucifer da san gallo, if any manwhatsoever should know it from me, wherefore i pray you to urge itno more. o my deer and honest neighbour bruno (quoth the doctor)assure thy selfe upon my soul, that whatsoever thou revealest to me,shall be under seale from all, but onely our selves. fie, fie masterdoctor, answered bruno, you are too pressing and importunate. sositting smiling to himselfe, shaking his head, and beating his breast,as if hee were in some straunge distraction of minde, stamping withhis feete, and beating his fiste oftentimes on the table, at ast hestarted uppe, and spake in this manner.
ah master doctor, the love i be to your capricious and rarelycircumcised experience, and likewise the confidence i repose in yourscrutinous taciturnitie, are both of such mighty and prevailingpower as i cannot conceale any thing from you, which you covet toknow. and therefore, if you wil sweare unto me by the crosse ofmonteson, that never (as you have already faithfully promised) youwill disclose a secret so admirable; i will relate it unto you, andnot otherwise. the doctor sware, and sware againe, and then bruno thusbegan.
know then my learned and judicious doctor, that it is not longtime since, when there lived in this citie of ours, a man veryexcellent in the art of nigromancie, who named himselfe michale scoto,because he was a scottishman borne, of many woorthy gentlemen (veryfew of them being now living) hee was much honoured and respected.when he grew desirous to depart from hence, upon their earnestmotion and entreaty; he left here two of his schollers behinde him,men of absolute skill and experience: giving them especial chargeand command, to do all possible services they could devise, forthose gentlemen who had so highly honoured him. the two famousschollers, were very helpefull to those gentlemen, in divers oftheir amorous occasions, and verie many other matters besides.
not long after, they finding the citie, and behaviour of thepeople sufficiently pleasing to them; they resolved on theircontinuance heere, entering into a league of love and friendshippewith divers, never regarding, whether they were gentlemen, or no, ordistinguishing the poore from the rich: but only in being conformeto their complexions, sociable and fit for friendship.
they created a kinde society, consisting of about five and twentymen, who should meete together twice in a moneth, and in a placereputed convenient for them: where being so assembled, every manuttered his minde to those two schollers, in such cases as they mostdesired, to have wherwith they were all satisfied the self-same night.it came so to passe, that buffalmaco and i, grew into acquaintancewith those two worthy schollers, and our private familiaritytogether proved so prosperous, that we were admitted into the samesociety, and so have ever since continued. now sir, i am to tell youmatter deserving admiration, and which (in very good judgements) wouldseeme to exceed all beleefe.
for, at every time when we were assembled together: you are not ableto imagine, what sumptuous hangings of tapistrie, did adorne thehall where we sate at meate, the tables covered in such royall manner,waited on by numberless noble and goodly attendants, both women andmen, serving readily, at each mans command of the company. the basins,ewers, pots, flaggons, and all the vessels else which stood before,and for the service of our diet, being composed onely of gold andsilver, and out of no worse did we both eate and drinke: the viandsbeing very rare and dainty, abounding in plenty and variety, accordingto the appetite of everie person, as nothing could be wished for,but it was instantly obtained.
in good sadnesse sir, i am not able to remember and tell you (withinthe compasse of a thousand yeares) what, and how manie severall kindesof musicall instruments, were continually played on before us; whatmultiplicity of waxe lights burned in all partes of the roomes;neither the excessive store of rich drugs, marchpanes, comfites, andrare banquetting stuffe, consumed there at one feasting, wherein therewanted no bounty of the best and purest wines. nor do i (masterdoctor) repute you so weakly witted, as to think, that in the timeof our being thus assembled there, any of us al were cloathed insuch simple and meane garments, as ordinarily are worne in the streetson mens bodies, or any so silly as the verie best you have: no sir,not any one man among us, but appeared by his apparrell, equall to thegreatest emperour on the earth, his robe most sumptuouslyimbroidered with precious stones, pearles, and carbuncles, as theworld affoordeth not the like. but above all the rest, the delightsand pleasures there, are beyond my capacity to expresse, or(indeede) any comparison: as namely, store of goodly and beautifullwomen, brought thither from all parts of the world; alwayesprovided, if men bee desirous of their company: but for your easiercomprehension, i will make some briefe relation of them to you,according as i heard them there named.
there is the great lady of barbanicchia; the queene of baschia;the wife to the great soldane, the empresse of osbeccho; theciancianfera of norniera; the semistante of berlinzona; and thescalpedra of narsia. but why do i breake my braine, in numbering up somany to you? all the queenes of the world are there, even so farreas to the schinchimurra of prester john, that hath a horne in themidst of her posteriores, albeit not visible to every eye.
now i am further that after we have tasted a cup of precious wine,fed on a few delicate comfits, and danced a dance or two to the raremusicke: every one taketh a lady by the hand, of whom he pleaseth tomake his election, and she conducteth him to her chamber, in verygrave and gracious manner. concerning the chambers there, each of themresembleth a paradise to looke on, they are so faire and goodly; andno lesse odorifferous in smell, then the sweetest perfumes in yourapothecaries shoppes, or the rare compounds of spices, when they arebeaten in an open morter. and as for the beds, they are infinitelyricher, then the verie costliest belonging to the duke of venice:yet (in such) each man is appointed to take his rest, the musicke ofrare cymbals lasting all night long, much better to be by youconsidered, then in my rude eloquence expressed.
but of all those rich and sumptuous beds (if pride of mine owneopinion do not deceive me) them two provided for buffalmaco and me,had hardly any equall: he having the queene of france as his ladyand mistresse, and i, the renowned queene of england, the onely twochoise beauties of the whole world, and wee appeared so pleasing intheir eyes, as they would have refused the greatest monarkes on theearth, rather then to bee rejected by us. now therefore, you mayeasily consider with your selfe, what great reason we have to livemore merrily, then any other men can doe: in regard we enjoy thegracious favour of two such royall queenes, receyving also from them(whensoever wee please to commaund them) a thousand or two thousandflorines at the least, which are both truly and duly sent us. enjoyingthus the benefit of this high happinesse, we that are companions ofthis society, do tearme it in our vulgar language, the pyrats voyageto corsica. because, as rovers or pyrats robbe and take away thegoodes of such as they meete withall, even so do we: only thereremaineth this difference betweene us, that they never restore whatthey have taken: which we do immediately afterward, whether it berequired or no. and thus master doctor, as to my most endeered friend,i have now revealed the meaning of sayling to corsica, after themanner of our private pyracie, and how important the close retentionof the voiage is, you are best able your selfe to judge: in whichregarde, remember your oathes and faithfull promises, or else i amundone for ever.
our worthy wise doctor, whose best skill scarsely extended so farre,as to cure the itch in children; gave such sound beleefe to therelation of bruno, as any man could doe, to the most certaine truth ofife or death: having his desire immeasurably enflamed, to bee made amember of this straunge societie, which hee more coveted, then anything in the world beside, accounting it a felicity farre beyond allother.
whereupon he answered bruno, that it was no great matter ofmervaile, if he lived so merily as he did, having such a singularsupply, to avoide all necessities whatsoever: and very hardly could herefraine from immediate request, to be accepted into the company.but yet he thought fit to deferre it further, untill he had made brunomore beholding to him, by friendly entertainments and othercourtesies, when he might (with better hope) be bold to move themotion.
well may you conceive, that nothing more hammerd in the doctorshead, then this rare voyage to corsica, and bruno was his dailyguest at dinner and supper, with such extraordinary apparances ofkindnesse and courtesie, as if the physitian could not live, except hehad the company of bruno. who seeing himselfe to bee so lovinglyrespected, and hating ingratitude, for favours so abundantly heaped onhim: hee painted the whole story of lent about his hall, and anagnus dei fairely gilt, on the portall of his chamber, as also agoodly urinall on his street doore, to the end, that such as had needeof his counsell, might know where so judicious a doctour dwelt. in agallery likewise by his garden, he painted the furious battailebetweene the rats and cats, which did (not a little) delight masterdoctor.
moreover, at such times as bruno had not supt with our physitian, hewould bee sure to tell him on the morrow, that the night passed, hehad bin with the company which he did wot of. and there (quoth he) thequeene of england having somewhat offended mee, i commanded, thatthe gomedra, belonging to the grand cham of tartaria, should bebrought me, and instantly shee was. what may be the meaning ofgomedrabe? said the doctor, i understand not those difficult names.i beleeve you sir, answered bruno, nor do i need to marvallethereat: and yet i have heard porcograsso speake, and also vannacenna,and both unexperienced in our language. you would say (replyed thedoctor) hippocrates and avicenna, who were two admirable physitians.it may be so (said bruno) and as hardly do i understand your names, asyou mine: but gomedra, in the grand chams language, signifies empressein ours. but had you once seene her sir, she would make you forget allphysicall observations, your arguments, receits, and medicines,onely to be in her heavenly presence, which words he used(perceiving his forward longing) to enflame him the more. not longafter, as the doctor was holding the candle to bruno, at theperfecting the bloody battayle of the cattes and rattes, because hecould never bee wearied in his companie, and therefore was the morewilling, to undergoe the office of the candle-holder: he resolved toacquaint him with his minde, and being all alone by themselves, thushe began.
bruno, as heaven knoweth, there is not this day any creature living,for whom i would gladly do more, then for thee, and the very leastword of thy mouth, hath power to commaund mee to goe bare-footed, evenfrom hence so farre as to peretola, and account my labour wellemployed for thy sake: wherefore, never wonder at my continuallkindnesse towards thee, using thee as my domesticke companion, andembracing thee as my bosome friend, and therefore i am the bolder inmooving one request unto thee. as thou well knowest, it is no longwhile since, when thou diddest acquaint me with the behaviour of thecorsicane roving company, to be one in so rare and excellent asociety, such hath bin my earnest longing ever since, as day nor nighthave i enjoyed anie rest, but should thinke my felicity beyond allcompare, if i could be entertained in fellowship among you.
nor is this desire of mine but upon great occasion, as thou thyselfe shalt perceive, if i prove accepted into your societie, andlet me then be made a mocking stocke for ever, if i cause not tocome thither one of the most delicate young women, that ever anieeye beheld, and which i my selfe saw (not above a yeare since) atcacavinciglia, on whom i bestowed my intirest affection, and (by thebest urinall that ever i gazed on) would have given her tenne fairebologninaes, to yeeld the matter i moved to her, which yet i could not(by any meanes) compasse. therefore, with all the flowing faculties ofmy soule i entreate thee, and all the very uttermost of my allindeede; to instruct me in those wayes and meanes, whereby i mayhope to be a member of you. which if thou dooest accomplish for me,and i may finde it effectually performed: i shall not onely be thytrue and loyall friend for ever, but will honour thee beside, beyondall men living.
i know thee to bee a man of judgement, deepely informed in allwell-grounded experience: thou seest what a propper, portly, andcomely man i am, how fitly my legges are answerable to my body, mylookes amiable, lovely, and of rosie colour: beside i am a doctor ofphysicke, of which profession (being only most expedient) i thinke youhave not one in your society. i have many commendable qualities in me,as, playing on divers instruments, exquisite in singing, and composingrare ditties, whereof i will instantly sing thee one. and so hebegan to sing.
bruno was swolne so bigge with desire of laughter, that hee hadscarsely any power to refraine from it: neverthelesse, he made thebest meanes he could devise: and the song being ended, the physitionsaide. how now bruno? what is thine opinion of my singing? beleeveme sir, replyed bruno, the vialles of sagginali, will loose their verybest times, in contending against you, so mirilifficially are thesweet accents of your voice heard. i tell thee truly bruno (answeredmaster doctor) thou couldst not by any possibility have beleeved it,if thou hadst not heard it. in good sadnes sir (said bruno) you speakemost truly. i could (quoth the doctor) sing thee infinite more beside,but at this time i must forbeare them. let mee then further informethee bruno, that beside the compleat perfections thou seest in me,my father was a gentleman, althogh he dwelt in a poore countryvillage, and by my mothers side, i am derived from them of vallecchio.moreover, as i have formerly shewn thee, i have a goodly library ofbookes, yea, and so faire and costly garments, as few physitians inflorence have the like. i protest to thee upon my faith, i have onegowne, which cost me (in readie money) almost an hundred poundes inbagattinoes, and it is not yet above ten yeares old. wherefore letme prevaile with thee, good bruno, to worke so with the rest of thyfriends, that i may bee one of your singular society; and, by thehonest trust thou reposest in mee, bee boldly sick whensoever thouwilt, my paines and physicke shall be freely thine, without thepayment of one single peny. bruno hearing his importunate words, andknowing him (as all men else did beside) to be a man of more wordsthen wit, saide. master doctor, snuffe the candle i pray you, and lendme a little more light with it hitherward, until i have finished thetailes of these rats, and then i wil answer you.
when the rats tailes were fully finished, bruno declaring by outwardbehaviour, that he greatly distasted the matter mooved, thus answered.worthy master doctor, the courtesies you have already extended towardsme, and the bountifull favours promised beside, i know to be exceedinggreat, and farre beyond the compasse of any merit in me. butconcerning your request, albeit in respect of your admired braineand wisedome, it is of little or no moment at all; yet it appearethover-mighty to mee, and there is not any man now living in theworld, that hath the like authoritie over me, and can more commaundme, then you (with one poore syllable) easily may doe: as well inregarde of my love and dutie, as also your singular and sententiousspeeches, able not onelie to make me breake a sound and setledresolution, but (almost) to move mountaines out of their places, andthe more i am in your learned company, so much the faster am i linckedunto you, in immooveable affection, so farre am i in love with youradmirable qualities. and had i no other reason, to affect you insuch endeared manner, as i doe; yet because you are enamoured of sorare a beauty, as you have already related to me, it onely were amotive sufficient to compell me. but indeed i must need tell you, thati have not so much power in this case, as you (perhaps) do imagine,which barreth me from such forward readines, as otherwise needed notto be urged. neverthelesse, having so solemnly ingaged your faith tome, and no way misdoubting your faithfull secrecy, i shall instructyou in some meanes to be observed; and it appeareth plainly to me,that being furnished with such plenty of bookes, as you are, and otherrich endowments, as you have before rehersed, you cannot but attaineto the full period of your longing desire.
speake boldly thy minde bruno, answered the doctour: for, i perceivethou hast no perfect knowledge of me as yet, neither what an especiallgift i have of secrecy. messer gasparino da salicete, when he wasjudge and potestat over the people of forlini, made choise of mee(among infinite of his dearest friends) to acquaint with a secret ofno meane moment. and such a faithfull secretary he found me, as iwas the onely man, that knew his mariage with bergamino; why thenshould any distrust be made of me? if it be so as you say sir(answered bruno) your credit is the sounder, and i dare the betteradventure on your fidelity: the meanes then which you are to worke by,i shall now direct you in.
we have alwayes in this noble society of ours, a captaine, and twocounsellors, which are changed at every six months end. and now atchristmas next (so neere drawing on) buffalmaco shal be electedcaptaine, and my selfe one of the counsellers, for so it is alreadyagreed on, and orderly set downe. now, he that is captain, may doemuch more then any other can, and appoint matters as himselfepleaseth. wherefore i thinke it very expedient, that so soone aspossibly you may, you procure acquaintance with buffalmaco, entreatinghim with all respective courtesie. hee is a man, who when heperceyveth you to be so wonderfully wise and discreete, he will beimmediatly in love with you: so, when you have your best sensesabout you, and your richest wearing garments on (alwayes remembred,that your acquaintance first be fully confirmed) then never feare tourge your request, for he can have no power at all to denie you;because i have already spoken of you to him, and find him to standaffected unto you verie intirely: thus when you have begunne thebusinesse, leave me to deale with him in the rest.
now trust me kinde friend bruno, replyed the physitian, i likeyour advice exceeding well. for, if hee be a man, that takethdelight to converse with men of skill and judgement, and you have madethe way for his knowing me: he wil him thirst, and long to followafter mee, to understand the incredible eloquence flowing from me, andthe rare composition of my musicall ditties, out of which he maylearne no meane wisedome. when the matter was thus agreed onbetweene them, bruno departed thence, and acquainted buffalmaco witheverie circumstance: which made him thinke everie day a yeare,untill he might in the fooling of mayster doctoar, according to hisowne fancie. who beeing also as desirous on the other side, to makeone in the corsicane voyage; could take no manner of rest either byday or night, till he was linked in friendship with buffalmaco,which very quickely after hee compassed.
for now there wanted no costly dinners and suppers, with aldelicates could be devised, for the entertainement of buffalmaco andbruno; who, like guests very easie to be invited, where rich wines andgood cheare are never wanting, needed little sending for, becausehis house was as familiar to them, as their owne. in the end, when thephysitian espyed an opportunitie apt for the purpose, he made the samerequest to buffalmaco, as formerly hee had done to bruno. whereatbuffalmaco, sodainly starting, and looking frowningly on bruno, asif he were extraordinarily incensed against him: clapping his handfuriously on the table, he sayde. i sweare by the great god ofpasignano, that i can hardly refrayne from giving thee such a blowon the face, as should make thy nose to fall at thy heeles: viletraitor as thou art: for none beside thy selfe, could discover so rareand excellent a secret unto this famous physitian. the doctour, withvery plausible and pleasing tearmes, excused the matter verieartificially; protesting, that another had revealed it unto him: andafter many wise circumstantiall allegations, at length hee prevailedso farre, that buffalmaco was pacified; who afterwardes turning inkinde manner, thus hee beganne.
master doctour, you have lived both at bologna, and heere in thesepartes with us, having (no doubt) sufficiently understoode, what it isto carry a close mouth, i meane the true charracter of taciturnitie.questionlesse, you never learned the a. b. c. as now foolish ideotsdo, blabbing their lessons all about the towne, which is much betterapprehended by rumination; and surely (if i be not much deceyved) yournativity happened on a sonday morning, sol being at that time, lord ofthe ascendent, joyned with mercurie in a fierie triplicitie. by suchconference as i have had with bruno, i conceyved (as he himselfealso did) that you were verie singular in physicke onely: but itseemeth, your studies reached a higher straine, for you havelearned, and know verie skilfullie, how to steale mens hearts fromthem, yea, to bereave them of their verie soules, which i perceyvethat you can farre better doe, then any man else living to myknowledge, only by your wise, witty, judicious, and more then meeremercurian eloquence, such as i never heard before.
the physitian interrupting him bashfully, turned himselfe untobruno, saying. did not i tell thee this before? observe what a notablething it is, to speake well, and to frequent the company of thewise. a thousand other, meerely blockes and dullardes by nature, couldnever so soone comprehend all the particularities of my knowledge,as this honest and apprehensive man hath done. thou didst not searchinto it halfe so soone, nor (indeed) did i expresse a quarter of myingenuity to thee, as (since his comming) hath prodigally flownefrom me.
well do i remember thy words, that buffalmaco delighted to beamong men of wisedome: and have i not now fitted him unto his ownedesire? how thinkest thou bruno? the best (quoth bruno) that any manliving in the world could do. ah worthy buffalmaco, answered thephysitian: what wouldst thou then have sayde, if thou hadst seene meat bologna, where there was neyther great nor small, doctor norscholler, but thought themselves happy by being in my company? if iought any debts, i discharged them with my very wittie words: andwhensoever i spake, i could set them al on a hearty laughter, somuch pleasure they tooke in hearing mee. and when i departed thence,no men in the world could bee more sorrowfull then they, as desiringnothing more then my remayning among them; which they expressed soapparantly, that they made humble suite and intercession to me, to beecheefe reader of the physicke-lecture, to all the schollers studyingour profession. but i could not be so perswaded, because my mindewas wholly addicted hither, to enjoy those goods, landes, andinheritances, belonging lineally to them of our house, and accordinglyi did performe it.
how now buffalmaco (quoth bruno) what is thine opinion now? thouwouldst not beleeve me when i told thee, that there is not a doctor inall these parts, more skilfull in distinguishing the urine of an asse,from any other, then this most expert and singular man: and i dareboldly maintaine it, that his fellow is not to bee found, from henceto the very gates of paris. go then, and doe the uttermost endeavourthat thou canst, to grant the request which he hath made.
beleeve me buffalmaco, saide the doctor, bruno hath spoken nothingbut truth, for i am scarsely knowne heere in this city, where (for themost part) they are all grosse-witted people, rather then any jotjudicious: but i would thou hadst seene me among the doctors, inmanner as i was wont to be. in troth sir, replyed buffalmaco, youare much more learned then ever i imagined, in which respect, speakunto you as it becommeth me, to a man so excellent in wit andunderstanding: i dare assure you, that (without any faile) i witprocure you to be one of our company.
after this promise thus made, the good cheare, favors and kindnessesdone by the doctor to them, was beyond the compasse of all relation:whereof they made no more then a meere mockery, flouting him to hisface, and yet his wisedome could not discerne it. moreover, theypromised, that they would give him to wife, the faire countesse dicivillari, who was the onely goodliest creature to be found in thewhole culattario of humane generation. the doctor demanded, whatcountesse that was? oh sir, answered buffalmaco, she is a greatlady, one worthy to have issue by; and few houses are there in theworld, where she hath not some jurisdiction and command: so that notmeane people onely, but even the greatest lords, at the sound of hertrumpets, do very gladlie pay her tribute. and i dare boldlyaffirme, that whensoever shee walketh to any place, she yeeldeth a hotand sensible savour, albeit she keepeth most of all close. yet onceevery night, shee duely observeth it (as a custome) to passe fromher owne house, to bathe her feete in the river of arno, and take alittle of the sweeter ayre: albeit her continuall residencie, iswithin the kingdome of laterino.
she seldome walketh abroad, but goeth with her attending officersabout her, who (for more demonstration of her greatnesse) do carry therod and plummet of lead. store of her lords and barons are every whereto be seene; as the tamagnino della porta, don meta di sirropa; manicodi scopa; signior squacchera, and others beside, who are (as isuppose) oftentimes your visitants, when of necessity they must beremembred. all our care and courtesie shall extend so farre (if we doenot falle in our enterprize) to leave you in the armes of so majesticka ladie, quite forgetting hir of cacavinciglia.
the physitian, who was borne and brought up at bologna, andtherefore understoode not these florentine tearmes: became fullycontented to enjoy the ladie; and, within some few dayes following,the painters brought him tydings, that they had prepared the way forhis entertainment into the societie of rovers. the day being come,when the supposed assembly was to be made the night following: thephysitian invited them both to dinner; when he demanding, whatprovision he shold make for his entrance into their company,buffalmaco returned him this answer, whereto hee gave very heedfullattention.
master doctor, you must be first of all, strongly armed withresolution and confidence: for, if you be not, you may not onlyreceyve hindrance, but also do us great harme beside: and now youshall heare, in what manner, and how you are to be bold andconstant. you must procure the meanes, this instant night, when allthe people are in their soundest sleepe, to stand upon one of thosehigh exalted tombs or monuments, which are in the churchyard ofsanta maria novella, with the very fairest gowne you have about you,because you may appeare in the more honorable condition, before theassembly seated together, and likewise to make good our speechesalready delivered of you, concerning your qualitie and profession:that the countesse, perceyving you to bee a woorthie gentleman, mayhave you first honoured with the bathe, and afterward knighted ather owne cost and charge. but you must continue stil upon the tombe(dreadlesse of nightly apparitions and visions) untill such time as wesend for you.
and for your better information in every particulare; a beaste,blacke and horned, but of no great stature, will come to fetch you:perhaps he will use some gastly noises, straunge leapes, and loftietrickes, onely to terrifie and affright you: but when he perceiveththat he cannot daunt you, hee will gently come neere you, which whenhe hath done, you may descend from off the tombe; and, withoutnaming or thinking on god, or any of his saintes, mount boldly onhis backe, for he will stand ready to receive you. being so seated,crosse your armes over your brest, without presuming to touch orhandle the beast, for he will carry you thence softly, and so bringyou along to the company. but if in all this time of your travaile,you call on heaven, any saint, or bee possessed with the least thoughtof feare: i must plainely tell you, that either hee will cast youdangerously, or throw you into some noysom place. and therefore, ifyou know your selfe, not to be of a constant courage, and sprightlybold, to undertake such an adventure as this: never presume anyfurther, because you may doe us a great deale of injurie, withoutany gaine or benefite to your selfe, but rather such wrong, as wewould be very sorry should happen unto so deere a friend.
alas honest buffalmaco, answered the physitian, thou art not halfeacquainted with me as yet: because i walke with gloves upon myhands, and in a long gowne, thou perhappes doest imagine mee afaint-hearted fellow. if thou didst know, what i have heeretofore doneat bologna in the night time, when i and my consorts went to visitepretty wenches, thou wouldst wonder at my couragious attempts. as i ama gentleman, one night, we met with a young bona roba, a paltrygreene-sicknesse baggage, scarsely above a cubite in height, andbecause she refused to go with us willingly, i gave her a kicke on thebum, and spurnde her more then a crosse-bowe shoote in distance fromme, and made her walke with us whether she would, or no. anothertime i remember, when having no other company but my boy, i wentthorow the churchyard of the fryars minors, after the sounding ofave maria: a woman hadde beene buried there the very same day, and yeti was not a jotte affraid.
wherefore, never be distrustfull of mee, but resolvedly buildeupon my courage. and in regard of my more honourable entertainment,i will then weare my scarlet gowne and hood, wherein i receyved mygraduation; and then do both of you observe, what a rejoycing willbe among the whole company, at the entertaining of such a man as i am,enough to create me captaine immediatly. you shall perceive also howthe case will go, after i have beene there but a while, in regard thatthe countesse (having as yet never seene me) is so deepely enamored ofmee: she cannot choose but bestow the bathe and knighthood on me,which shee shall have the more honour of, in regard i am well ableto maintaine it, therefore referre all the rest to mee, and nevermisdoubt your injurie or mine.
spoken like a gallant, replyed buffalmaco, and i feare not now,but we shall winne credite by your company. but be carefull i prayyou, that you make not a mockery of us, and come not at all, orfayle to be there, when the beast shall be sent for you; i speake itthe rather, because it is cold weather, and you gentlemen physitianscan hardly endure it. you are carefull of mee (quoth the doctor) and ithanke you for it, but i applaud my faire starres, i am none of yournice or easie-frozen fellowes, because cold weather is very familiarto me. i dare assure you, when i arise in the night time for thatnaturall office whereto all men are subject, i weare no warmerdefence, then my thin wastcoat over my shirt, and finde itsufficient for the coldest weather at any time. when bruno andbuffalmaco had taken their leave, the physitian, so soone as nightdrew neere, used many apt excuses to his wife, stealing forth hisscarlet gowne and hood unseene of any, wherewith being clothed: at thetime appointed, he got upon one of the marble tombes, staying there(quaking with cold) awaiting when the beast should come. buffalmaco,being a lusty tall man of person, had got an ugly masking suite,such as are made use of in tragedies and playes, the out-side being ofblack shagged haire, wherwith being cloathed, he seemed like a strangedeformed beare, and a divels vizard over his face, with two gastlyhorrible hornes, and thus disguised, bruno following him, they went tobehold the issue of the businesse, so farre as the new market place,closely adjoining to santa maria novella.
having espyed master doctor uppon the tombe, buffalmaco in hismishapen habite, began to bound, leape, and carriere, snuffling andblowing in mad and raging manner: which when the physitian saw, hishaire stood on end, he quaked and trembled, as being more fearfullthen a woman, wishing himselfe at home againe in his house, ratherthen to behold a sight so dreadfull. but because he was come forth,and had such an earnest desire, to see the wonders related to him;he made himselfe so coragious as possibly he could, and bare all outin formall manner. after that buiffalmaco had (an indifferent while)plaide his horsetrickes, ramping and stamping somewhat strangely:seeming as become of much milder temper, he went neere to the tombwhereon the physitian stood, and there appeared to stay contentedly.
master doctor, trembling and quaking still extreamely, was sofarre dismayed, as he knew not what was best to be done, either tomount on the beasts backe, or not to mount at all. in the end,thinking no harme could happen to him, if he were once mounted, withthe second feare, hee expelled the former, and descending downe softlyfrom the tombe, mounted on the beast, saying out alowde: god, saintdominicke, and my good angell helpe to defend mee. seating himselfe sowell as he could, but trembling still exceedingly; he crossed hisarmes over his stomacke, according to the lesson given him.
then did buffalmaco shape his course in milde manner, toward santamaria della scala, and groping to finde his way in the darke, wenton so farre as the sisters of ripole, commonly called the virginsanctuary. not farre off from thence, were divers trenches andditches, wherein such men as are imployed in necessarynightservices, used to empty the countesse di cimillari, and afterwardimployed it for manuring husbandmens grounds. buffalmaco, being comeneere one of them, he stayed to breath himselfe awhile, and thencatching fast hold on one of the doctours feete, raysed him somewhathigher on his back, for the easier discharging of his burthen, andso pitched him (with his head forwardes) into the laystall.
then began he to make a dreadful kinde of noise, stamping andtrampling with his feete, passing backe againe to santa maria dellascala, and to prato d'ognissanti, where hee met with bruno, who wasconstrained to forsake him, because he could not refraine from lowdelaughter, then both together went backe once more, to see how thephysitian would behave himselfe, being so sweetely embrued.
master doctor, seeing himselfe to bee in such an abhominablestinking place, laboured with all his utmost endevour, to gethimself released thence: but the more he contended and strove forgetting forth, he plunged himselfe the further in, being mostpitifully myred from head to foot, sighing and sorrowingextraordinarily, because much of the foule water entred in at hismouth. in the end, being forced to leave his hood behinde him,scrambling both with his hands and feet, he got landing out of hisstinking labyrinth, and having no other means, home he returned to hisown house, where knocking at the door he was at length admittedentrance. the doore being scarse made fast againe after his lettingin, buffalmaco and bruno were there arrived, listning how m. doctorshould bee welcomd home by his angry wife: who scolding and railing athim with wonderfull impatience, gave him most hard and bitterspeeches, terming him the vilest man living.
where have you bin sir? quoth she. are you becom a night-walkerafter other women? and could no worse garments serve your turne, butyour doctors gown of scarlet? am i to suffer this behaviour? or am noti sufficient to content you, but you must be longing after change? iwould thou hadst bin stifled in that foule filth, where thy foulerlife did justly cast thee. behold goodly master doctor of theleystall, who being maried to an honest woman must yet go abroad inthe night time, insatiatly lusting after whores and harlots. withthese and the like intemperate speeches, she ceased not to afflict andtorment him, till the night was almost spent, and the doctor broughtinto a sweeter savour.
the next morning, bruno and buffalmaco, colourd their bodyes witha strange kinde of painting, resembling blisters, swellings, andbruises, as if they had bin extreamly beaten; came to the physitianshouse, finding him to be newly up, al the house yet smelling of hisfoule savour (although it had bin very well perfumed) and beingadmitted to him in the garden, hee welcommed them with the morningssalutations. but bruno and buffalmaco (being otherwise provided forhim) delivering stearne and angry lookes, stamping and chafing,bruno thus replyed.
never speake so faire and flattering to us, for we are movedbeyond all compasse of patience. all misfortunes in the worlde fallupon you, and an evill death may you dye, like the most false andperfidious traitor living on the earth. we must beate our braines, andmove all our most endeared friends, onely for your honor andadvancement: while wee were well neere starved to death in the coldlike dogs, and, by your breach of promise, have bin this night soextreamly beaten, as if (like asses) we should have beene driven torome.
but that which is most greevous of all, is danger of excluding outof the society, where wee tooke good order for your admittance, andfor your most honourable entertainment. if you wi not credit us,behold our bodies, and let your owne eyes be witnesses, in what cruellmanner we have bin beaten. so taking him aside under the gallery,where they might not be discovered by overmuch light, they openedtheir bosomes, shewing him their painted bodies, and sodainly closedthem up againe.
the physitian laboured to excuse himselfe, declaring his misfortunesat large, and into what a filthy place he was throwne. it maketh nomatter (answered buffalmaco) i would you had bin throwen from offthe bridge into arno, where you might have beene recommended to thedivell and all his saints. did not i tell you so much before. ingood sadnesse (quoth the doctor) i neyther commended my selfe togod, nor any of his saints. how? sayde buffalmaco, i am sure youwill not maintaine an untruth, you used a kind of recommendation:for our messenger told us, that you talked of god, s. dominicke, andyour good angell, whom you desired to assist you, being soaffrighted with feare, that you trembled like a leafe upon a tree, notknowing indeede where you were. thus have you unfaithfully dealtwith us, as never any man shall doe the like againe, in seekinghonour, and losing it through your own negligence.
master doctor humbly entreated pardon, and that they would notrevile him any more, labouring to appease them by the best words hecould use, as fearing least they should publish this great disgrace ofhim. and whereas (before) he gave them gracious welcomes; now heredoubled them with farre greater courtesies, feasting them daily athis own table, and evermore delighting in their company. thus (asyou have heard) two poore painters of florence, taught master doctorbetter wit, then all the learned at bologna.
the eight day, the tenth novell
whereby appeareth, that such as meet with cunning harlots, and
suffer themselves to be deceived by them: must sharpen their wits,
to make them requitall in the selfesame kinde
a cicilian courtezane, named madame biancafiore, by her craftiewit and policie, deceived a young merchant, called salabetto, of allthe money he had taken for his wares at palermo. afterward, hemaking shew of comming hither againe, with farre richer merchandisesthen hee brought before: made the meanes to borrow a great summe ofmoney of her, leaving her so base a pawne, as well requited her forher former cozenage.
needlesse it were to question, whether the novell related by thequeene, in divers passages thereof, mooved the ladies to heartylaughter, and likewise to compassionate sighes and teares; as pittyingmadame helena in her hard misfortune, and yet applauding thescholler for his just revenge. but the discourse being ended, dioneus,who knew it was his office to be the last speaker every day, aftersilence was commanded, he began in this manner.
worthy ladies, it is a matter very manifest, that deceits do appeareso much the more pleasing, when (by the selfesame meanes) the subtledeceyver is artificially deceived. in which respect, though you allhave reported very singular deceits: yet i meane to tel you one,that may prove as pleasing to you, as any of your owne. and so muchthe rather, because the woman deceived, was a great and cunningmistris in beguiling others; equalling (if not excelling) any ofyour former beguilers.
it hath bene observed heretofore, and (happily) at this very dayit is as frequent, that in all cities and townes upon the seacoasts,having ports for the benefit and venting merchandises; merchants useto bring their wealthy laden vessels thither. and when they unlade anyship of great fraught, there are prepared store-houses, which inmany places are called magazines or doganaes, at the charge of thecommunalty, or lord of the towne or city, for the use whereof, theyreceive yearly gain and benefit. into those warehouses, they deliver(under writing, and to the owners of them in especiall charge) alltheir goods and merchandises, of what price or valew soever they are.
such as be the owners of these magazines, when the wares are thusstored uppe in them, doe safely locke them up there with theirkeyes, having first registred downe truly all the goods, in theregister belonging to the custome-house, that the merchant may havea just account rendred him, and the rights payed to thecustomehouse, according to the register, and as they are either inpart, or in all made sale of.
brokers are continually there attending, being informed in thequality of the merchandises stored, and likewise to what merchantsthey appertaine: by meanes of these men, and according as the goodscome to their hands, they devise to have them exchaunged, trucked,vented, and such other kinds of dispatches, answerable to the mensminds, and worth of the commodities. as in many other kingdomes andcountries, so was this custome observed at palermo in sicily, wherelikewise then were, and (no doubt) now adayes are, store of women,faire and comely of person, but yet vowed enemies to honesty.
neverthelesse, by such as know them not, they are held and reputedto be blamelesse women, and by yeilding their bodyes unto generalluse, are the occasion of infinite misfortunes to men. for so sooneas they espy a merchant-stranger there arrived, they win informationfrom the booke belonging to the magazin, what wares are thereinstored, of what valew they bee, and who is the owner of them.afterwards, by amorous actions, and affable speeches, they allure yongmerchants to take knowledge of them, to bee familiar in their company,till from some they get most part of their wealth, from others all.nay, divers have gone so farre, as to make port-sale of ship, goods,and person, so cunningly they have bene shaven by these barbers, andyet without any razor.
it came to passe, and no long time since, that a young florentine ofours, named niccolo de cignano, but more usually called salabetto,imployed as factor for his maister, arrived at palermo; his shipstored with many woollen cloathes, a remainder of such as had bin soldat the mart of salerno; amounting in valew to above five hundredflorines of gold. when he had given in his packet to thecustome-house, and made them up safe in his warehouse; withoutmaking shew of desiring any speedy dispatch, he delighted to viewall parts of the city, as mens minds are continuallie addicted tonovelties. he being a very faire and affable yong man, easie to kindleaffection in a very modest eie: it fortuned, that a courtezane, one ofour before remembred shavers, who termed hir selfe madame biancafiore,having heard somewhat concerning his affairs, beganne to dartamorous glances at him. which the indiscreete youth perceyving, andthinking her to be some great lady: began also to grow halfeperswaded, that his comely person was pleasing to her and therefore hewould carrie this good fortune of his somewhat cautelously.
without imparting his mind unto any one, he would daily passe tooand fro before her doore; which she observing, and havingindifferently wounded him with her wanton piercing lookes: she beganto use the first tricke of her trade, by pretending her enflamedaffection towards him, which made her pine and consume away in care,except he might be moved to pitty her. whereupon, she sent one ofher pandoraes unto him, perfectly instructed in the art of amaquerella, who (after many cunning counterfetted sighes, andteares, which she had alwayes ready at command) told him that hiscomely person and compleate perfections, had so wounded the very souleof her mistresse, as she could enjoy no rest in any place, either byday or night. in regard whereof, she desired (above all things else)to meete with him privately in a bathe: with which wordes, shestraightway tooke a ring forth of her pursse, and in most humblemanner, delivered it unto him, as a token from her mistresse.
salabetto having heard this message, was the onely joyfull manthat could be: and having receyved the ring, looking on itadvisedly; first kissed it, and then put it upon his finger. then inanswer to the messenger, he sayd: that if her mistresse biancafioreaffected him, she sustained no losse thereby, in regard he loved heras fervently, and was ready to be commanded by her, at any timewhensoever she pleased.
she having delivered this message to her mistresse, was presentlyreturned backe againe to him, to let him understand, in which of thebathes she meant to meet him, on the next morrow in the evening.this being counsell for himselfe onely to keepe, he imparted it not toany friend whatsoever; but when the houre for their meeting wascome, he went unto the place where he was appointed, a bathe(belike) best agreeing with such businesse.
not long had he taried there, but two women slaves came laden tohim, the one bearing a mattresse of fine fustian on hir head, andthe other a great basket filled with many things. having spred themattresse in a faire chamber on a couch-bed, they covered it withdelicate white linnen sheets, all about embroidred with fairefringes of gold, then laid they on costly quilts of rich silkes,artificially wrought with gold and silver knots, having pearles andprecious stones interwoven among them, and two such rich pillowes,as sildome before had the like bin seene. salabetto putting off hisgarments, entred the bath prepared for him, where the two slaveswashed his body very neatly. soone after came biancafiore hirselfe,attended on by two other women slaves, and seeing salabetto in thebathe; making him a lowly reverence, breathing forth infinitedissembled sighes, and teares trickling downe her cheekes, kissing andembracing him, thus she spake.
i know not what man else in the worlde, beside thy selfe, could havethe power to bring me hither: the fire flew from thy faire eies (othou incompareable lovely tuscane) that melted my soule, and makesme onely live at thy command. then hurling off her light wearinggarment (because she came prepared for the purpose) shee stept intothe bathe to him, and, not permitting the slaves a-while to comeneere, none but her selfe must now lave his body, with muskecompounded sope and gilly-floures. afterward, the slaves washed bothhim and her, bringing two goodly sheetes, softe and white, yeeldingsuch a delicate smell of roses, even as if they had bene made ofrose-leaves. in the one, they folded salabetto, and her in theother, and so conveyed them on their shoulders unto the preparedbed-couch, where because they should not sweate any longer, they tookethe sheets from about them, and laid them gently in the bed.
then they opened the basket, wherein were divers goodly silverbottles, some filled with rosewaters, others with flowers oforenges, and waters distilled of gelsomine, muske, and amber-greece,wherewith (againe) the slaves bathed their bodyes in the bed, andafterward presented them with variety of comfites, as also veryprecious wines, serving them in stead of a little collation. salabettosupposed himself to be in paradise: for this appeared to be no earthlyjoy, bestowing a thousand gladsome gazes on her, who (questionlesse)was a most beautifull creature, and the tarrying of the slaves, seemedmillions of yeares to him, that hee might more freely embrace hisbiancafiore. leaving a waxe taper lighted in the chamber, the slavesdeparted, and then shee sweetly embracing salabetto, bestowed thosefurther favours on him, which hee came for, and she was notsqueamish in the affoording; wherof he was exceedingly joyfull,because he imagined, that they proceeded from the integrity of heraffection towards him.
when she thought it convenient time to depart thence, the slavesreturned; they cloathed themselves, and had a banquet standing readyprepared for them; wherewith they cheared their wearyed spirits, afterthey had first washed in odorifferous waters. at parting: salabetto(quoth she) whensoever thy leysures shal best serve thee, i willrepute it as my cheefest happinesse, that thou wilt accept a supperand lodging in my house, which let it be this instant night, if thoucanst. he being absolutely caught, both by hir beauty and flatteringbehaviour: beleeved faithfully, that he was as intirely beloved ofher, as the heart is of the body: whereuppon hee thus answered.madame, whatsoever pleaseth you, must needes be much more acceptableunto mee: and therefore, not onely may command my service thisnight, but likewise the whole employment of my life, to be onely yoursin my very best studies and endeavours.
no sooner did she heare this answer, but she returned home to herowne house, which she decked in most sumptuous maner, and also madeready a costly supper, expecting the arrivall of salabetto: who whenthe darke night was indifferently well entred, went thither, and waswelcommed with wonderfull kindnesse, wanting no costly wines anddelicates all the supper while. being afterward conducted into agoodly chamber, he smelt there admirable sweete senting savours,such as might well beseeme a princes pallace. he beheld a mostcostly bed, and very rich furniture round about the roome: whichwhen he had duly considered to himself, he was constantly perswaded,that she was a lady of infinit wealth. and although he had hearddivers flying reports concerning her life, yet hee would not crediteany thing amisse of her, for albeit she might (perhappes) beguile someother; yet shee affected him (he thought) in better manner, and nosuch misfortune could happen to him.
having spent all the night with her in wanton dalliances, andbeing risen in the morning; to enflame his affection more and moretowards her, and to prevent any ill opinion he might conceyve ofher, she bestowed a rich and costly girdle on him, as also a purssemost curiously wrought, saying to him. my sweet salabetto, withthese testimonies of my true affection to thee, i give thee faithfullyto understand, that as my person is onely subjected thine; so thishouse and all the riches in it, remaineth absolutely at thydisposition, or whatsoever hereafter shal happen within the compasseof my power.
he being not a little proud of this her bountifull offer (havingnever bestowed any gift on her, because by no meanes shee wouldadmit it) after many sweet kisses and embraces; departed thence, tothe place where the merchants usually frequented: resorting to her(from time to time) as occasion served, and paying not one single penyfor all his wanton pleasure, by which cunning baytes (at length) shecaught him.
it came to passe, that having made sale of all his clothes,whereby hee had great gaines, and the moneyes justly payed him atthe times appointed: biancafiore got intelligence thereof; yet notby him, but from one of the brokers. salabetto comming one night tosup with her, she embraced and kissed him as she was wont to doe,and seemed so wonderfully addicted in love to him, even as if sheewould have dyed with delight in his armes. instantly, shee would needsbestow two goodly gilt standing cuppes on him, which salabetto by nomeanes would receive, because she had formerly bin very bountifullto him, to above the value of an hundred crowns, and yet she would nottake of him so much as a mite. at length, pressing still more tokensof her love and bounty on him, which he as courteously denied, asshe kindly offered: one of her women-slaves (as shee had beforecunningly appointed) sodainely calling her, forthwith she departed outof her chamber. and when she had continued a pretty while absent,she returned againe weeping, and throwing her selfe downe upon herpallet, breathed forth such sighes and wofull lamentations, as nowoman could possibly doe the like.
salabetto amazedly wondering thereat, tooke her in his armes, andweeping also with her, said. alas my deare love, what sodainaccident hath befalne you, to urge this lamentable alteration? ifyou love me, hide it not from me. after he had of entreated her inthis manner, casting her armes about his necke, and sighing as ifher heart would breake, thus she replyed. ah salabetto, the onelyjewell of my joy on earth, i knowe not what to do, or say, for (evennow) i received letters from messina, wherein my brother writes to me,that although it cost the sale of all my goods, or whatsoever else ihave beside, i must (within eight dayes space) not faile to send him athousand florins of gold, or else he must have his head smitten off,and i know not by what meanes to procure them so soone. for, if thelimitation of fifteene dayes might serve the turne, i could borrowthem in a place, where i can command a farre greater summe, or elsei would sell some part of our lands. but beeing no way able tofurnish him so soone, i would i had died before i heard thesedismall tydings. and in the uttering of these words, she graced themwith such cunning dissembled sorrow, as if she had meant truly indeed.salabetto, in whom the fury of his amorous flames, had consumed agreat part of his necessary understanding, beleeving thesecounterfetted tears and complaints of hers, to proceed from anhonest meaning soule; rashly and foolishly thus replied. dearebiancafiore, i cannot furnish you with a thousand golden florines, butam able to lend you five hundred if i were sure of their repaymentat fifteene dayes, wherein you are highly beholding to fortune, that ihave made sale of all my cloathes; which if they had lyen still onmy hand, my power could not stretch to lend you five florines. alasdeare heart (quoth she) would you be in such want of money, and hideit from her that loves you so loyally? why did you not make yourneed knowne to me? although i am not furnished of a thousand florines;yet i have alwaies ready three or foure hundred by me, to do any kindeoffice for my friend. in thus wronging me, you have robd me of allboldnes, to presume upon your offer made me. salabetto, far fasterinveigled by these words then before, said. let not my folly (brightbiancafiore) cause you to refuse my friendly offer, in such a caseof extreme necessity: i have them ready pre. pared for you, and amheartily sory, that my power cannot furnish you with the whole summe.
then catching him fast in her armes, thus she answered. now iplainly perceive, my dearest salabetto, that the love thou bearestme is true and perfect; when, without expectation of beingrequested, thou art readie to succour me in such an urgent neede,and with so faire a summe of florines. sufficiently was i thine ownebefore, but now am much more ingaged by so high deserving; with thisparticular acknowledgement for ever, that my brothers head wasredeemed by thy goodnesse onely. heaven beareth me record, howunwilling i am to be beholding in this kind, considring that you are amerchant, and merchants furnish al their affairs with ready monis: butseeing necessity constraineth me, and i make no doubt of repaimentat the time appointed: i . p shall the more boldly accept yourkindnes, with this absolute promise beside, that i wil rather sell allthe houses i have, then breake my honest word with you.
counterfeit teares still drayning downe her cheeks, and salabettokindly comforting her; he continued there with hir all that night,to expresse him selfe her most liberall servant. and, withoutexpecting any more requesting, the next morning he brought her thefive hundred florines, which she received with a laughing heart, butoutward dissembled weeping eies; salabetto never demanding any othersecurity, but onely her single promise.
biancafiore, having thus received the five hundred florines, theindiction of the almanacke began to alter: and whereas (before)salabetto could come see her whensoever he pleased, many occasions nowhappened, whereby he came seven times for once, and yet his entrancewas scarsely admitted, neither was his entertainment so affable, orhis cheare so bountifull, as in his former accesses thither. moreover,when the time for repaiment was come, yea a moneth or two over-past,and he demanded to have his money; hee could have nothing but wordsfor paiment. now he began to consider on the craft and cunning of thiswicked woman, as also his owne shallow understanding, knowing he couldmake no proofe of his debt, but what her selfe listed to say, havingneither witnes, specialty, bill or bond to shew: which made hisfolly so shamefull to him, that he durst not complaine to anyperson, because he had received some advertisements before, whereto hewold by no means listen, and now should have no other amends, butpublike infamie, scorne and disgrace, which made him almost weary ofhis life, and much to bemoane his owne unhappinesse. he receivedalso divers letters from his master, to make returne of the 500florines over by way of banke, according as he had used to do: butnowe could performe no such matter.
hereupon, because his error should not be discovered, he departed ina small vessell thence, not making for pisa, as he should have done,but directly for naples hee shaped his course. at that instantlodged there, don pietro della canigiano, treasurer of the empresse ofconstantinople, a man of great wisedome and understanding, as alsovery ingenious and politike, he being an especiall favourer ofsalabetto and all his friendes, which made him presume the more boldly(being urged thereto by meere necessity, the best corrector ofwandering wits) to acquaint him with his lamentable misfortune, inevery particular as it had hapned, requesting his aid and advice,how he might best weare out the rest of his dayes, because hee nevermeant to visit florence any more.
canigiano being much displeased at the repetition of his follie,sharply reproved him, saying. thou hast done leudly, in carying thyselfe so loosely, and spending thy masters goods so carelesly, whichthough i cannot truly tearme spent, but rather art meerely cousenedand cheated of them, yet thou seest at what a deere rate thou hastpurchased pleasure, which yet is not utterly helplesse, but may by onemeanes or other be recovered. and being a man of woonderfullapprehension, advised him instantly what was to bee done, furnishinghim also with a summe of money, wherewith to adventure a second losse,in hope of recovering the first againe: he caused divers packes tobe well bound up, with the merchants markes orderly made on them,and bought about twenty buttes or barrelles, all filled (as it were)with oyle, and these pretended commodities being shipt, salabettoreturned with them to palermo. where having given in his packets tothe customehouse, and entred them all under his owne name, as beingboth owner and factor: all his wares were lockt up in his magizine,with open publication, that he would not vent any of them, beforeother merchandises (which he daily expected) were there also arrived.
biancafiore having heard thereof, and understanding withall, that hehad brought merchandises now with him, amounting to above two thousandflorins, staying also in expectation of other commodities, valewingbetter then three thousand more, she beganne to consider with herselfe, that she had not yet gotten money enough from him, andtherefore would cast a figure for a farre bigger booty. which that shemight the more fairely effect, without so much as an imagination ofthe least mistrust: she would repay him backe his five hundredflorines, to winne from him a larger portion of two or threethousand at the least, and having thus setled her determination, shesent to have him come speake with her. salabetto, having benesoundly bitten before, and therefore the better warranted from thelike ranckling teeth, willingly went to her, not shewing any signeof former discontent: and she, seeming as if she knew nothing of thewealth he brought with him, gracing him in as loving manner as evershe had done, thus she spake.
i am sure salabetto, you are angry with mee, because i restorednot your florines at my promised day. salabetto smiling, presentlyanswered. beleeve me lady (quoth he) it did a little distast me,even as i could have bin offended with him, that should plucke outmy heart to bestow it on you, if it would yeelde you anycontentment. but to let you know unfainedly, how much i am incensedwith anger against you: such and so great is the affection i beareyou, that i have solde the better part of my whole estate,converting the same into wealthy merchandises, which i have alreadiebrought hither with mee, and valewing above two thousand florines, allwhich are stored up in my magazine. there must they remaine, tillanother ship come forth of the westerne parts, wherein i have a muchgreater adventure, amounting unto more then three thousand florines.and my purpose is, to make my aboade heere in this city, which hathwon the sole possession of my heart, onely in regard of mybiancafiore, to whom i am so intirely devoted, as both my selfe, andwhatsoever else is mine (now or hereafter) is dedicated onely to herservice; whereto thus she replyed.
now trust me salabetto, whatsoever redoundeth to thy good andbenefite, is the cheefest comfort of my soule, in regard i prize thylove dearer then mine owne life, and am most joyfull of thy returnehither againe; but much more of thy still abiding heere, because iintend to live onely with thee, so soone as i have taken order forsome businesse of import. in the meane while, let me entreate theeto hold me excused, because before thy departure hence, thou camestsometimes to see me, without thy entrance admitted; and other-whilesagaine, found not such entertainement, as formerly had bene affoorded.but indeede, and above all the rest, in not re-paying thy moneyaccording to my promise. but consider good salabetto, in what greattrouble and affliction of minde i then was, both in regard of mybrothers danger, and other important occurrences beside, whichmollestations do much distract the senses, and hinder kindecourtesies, which otherwise would bee extended liberally.
last of all consider also, how difficult a thing it is for awoman, so sodainly to raise the summe of a thousand golden florines,when one friend promiseth, and performeth not; another protesteth, yethath no such meaning; a third sweareth, and yet proveth a falselyar: so that by being thus ungently used, a breach is made betweenethe best frends living. from hence it proceeded, and no other defectelse, that i made not due returne of your five hundred florins. nosooner were you departed her but i had them readie, and as manymore, and could i have knowne whither to send them, they had bene withyou long time since, which because i could not (by any meanes)compasse, i kept them still for you in continuall readinesse, ashoping of your comming hither againe. so causing a purse to bebrought, wherein the same florines were, which hee had deliveredher; she gave it into his hand, and prayed him to count them over,whether there were so many, or no.
never was salabettoes heart halfe so joyfull before; and havingcounted them, found them to be his owne five hundred florines: then,putting them up into his pocket, he saide. comfort of my life, fullwell i know that whatsoever you have saide, is most certaine; butlet us talke no more of falshood in friendship, or casuall accidentshappening unexpected: you have dealt with mee like a most loyallmistresse, and heere i protest unfainedly to you, that as well inrespect of this kinde courtesie, as also the constancy of mineaffection to you, you cannot request hereafter a far greater summeof me, to supply any necessarie occasion of yours; but (if my powercan performe it) you shall assuredly finde it certaine: make proofethereof whensoever you please, after my other goods are landed, andi have established my estate here in your city.
having in this manner renewed his wonted amity with her, and withwords farre enough off from all further meaning: salabetto beganagaine to frequent her company, she expressing all former familiarity,shewing her selfe as lavishly bountifull to him, in all respects asbefore she had done, nay, many times in more magnificent manner.
but he intending to punish her notorious trechery towards him,when she left him as an open scorne to the world, wounded withdisgrace, and quite out of credit with all his friends: she having (ona day) solemnly invited him, to suppe and lodge in her house allnight; he went, both with sad and melancholly lookes, seeming asovercome with extreamity of sorrow. biancafiore mervayling at thisstrange alteration in him, sweetly kissing and embracing him: wouldneeds know the reason of his passionate affliction, and hepermitting her to urge the question oftentimes together, withoutreturning any direct answere; to quit her in her kind, and withcoine of her owne stampe, after a few dissembled sighes, he began inthis manner.
ah my dearest love, i am utterly undone, because the shippecontaining the rest of mine expected merchandises, is taken by thepyrates of monago, and put to the ransome of tenne thousand florinesof gold, and my part particularly, is to pay one thousand. at thisinstant i am utterly destitute of money, because the five hundredflorines which i received of you, i sent hence the next daie followingto naples, to buy more cloathes, which likewise are to be sent hither.and if i should now make sale of the merchandizes in my magazine(the time of generall utterance being not yet come) i shall not make apennyworth for a penny. and my misfortune is the greater, because i amnot so well knowne heere in your city, as to find some succour in suchan important distresse; wherfore i know not what to do or say.moreover, if the money be not speedily sent, our goods will be carriedinto monago, and then they are past all redemption utterly.
biancafiore appearing greatly discontented, as one verily perswaded,that this pretended losse was rather hers, then his, because she aymedat the mainest part of all his wealth: began to consider with herselfe, which was the likeliest course to bee taken, for saving thegoods from carriage to monago: wherupon thus she replied. heavenknoweth (my dearest salabetto) how thy love maketh me sorrowfull forthis misfortune, and it greeveth me to see thee any way distressed:for if i had mony lying by mee (as many times i have) thou shouldstfinde succour from my selfe onely, but indeede i am not able tohelpe thee. true it is, there is a friend of mine, who did lend mefive hundred florines in my need, to make uppe the other summe which iborrowed of thee: but he demandeth extreme interest, because he willnot abate any thing of thirty in the hundred, and if you should beeforced to use him, you must give him some good security. now for mypart, the most of my goods here i will pawne for thee: but what pledgecan you deliver in to make up the rest? wel did salabetto conceive theoccasion why she urged this motion, and was so diligent in doing himsuch a pleasure: for it appeared evidently to him, that her selfewas to lend the mony, wherof he was not a litle joyful, seeming verythankful to hir. then he told her, that being driven to suchextremity, how unreasonable soever the usury was, yet he wouldgladly pay for it. and for her friends further security, hee wouldpawne him all the goods in his magazine, entering them downe in thename of the party, who lent the money. onely he desired to keepe thekeyes of the ware-house, as well to shew his merchandises, when anymerchant shot bee so desirous: as also to preserve them from illusing, transporting or changing, before his redemption of them.
she found no fault with his honest offer, but sayde, hee shewedhimselfe a well-meaning man, and the next morning shee sent for abroker, in whom she reposed especiall trust; and after they hadprivately consulted together, shee delivered him a thousand goldenflorines, which were caried by him presently to salabetto, and thebond made in the brokers name, of all the goods remaining insalabettoes ware-house, with composition and absolute agreement, forthe prefixed time of the monies repaiment. no sooner was this trickefully accomplished, but salabetto seeming as if he went to redeeme histaken goods: set saile for naples towards pietro della canigiano, withfifteene hundred florines of gold: from whence also he sentcontentment to his master at florence (who imployd him as his factorat palermo) beside his owne packes of cloathes. he made repaymentlikewise to canigiano, for the monies which furnished him in this lastvoyage, and any other to whom hee was indebted. so there he stayedawhile with canigiano, whose counsel thus holpe him to out-reach thesicillian courtezane: and meaning to deale in merchandise no more,afterward he returned to florence and there lived in good reputation.
now as concerning biancafiore, when she saw that salabettoreturned not againe to palermo, she beganne to grow somewhatabashed, as halfe suspecting that which followed. after she hadtarried for him above two moneths space, and perceived hee came not,nor any tydings heard of him: shee caused the broker to breake openthe magazine, casting forth the buttes or barrels, which shee beleevedto bee full of good oyles. but they were all filled with seawater,each of them having a small quantity of oyle floating on the toppe,onely to serve when a tryall should bee made. and then unbinding thepackes, made up in formall and merchantable manner: there wasnothing else in them, but logges and stumpes of trees, wrapthandsomely in hurdles of hempe and tow; onely two had cloathes inthem. so that (to bee briefe) the whole did not value two hundredcrownes: which when she saw, and observed how cunningly she wasdeceived: a long while after shee sorrowed, for repaying backe thefive hundred florines, and folly in lending a thousand more, usingit as a proverbe alwaies after to hit selfe: that whosoever dealt witha tuscane, had neede to have sound sight and judgement. so remainingcontented (whither she would or no) with her losse: she plainlyperceyved, that although she lived by cheating others, yet now atthe length she had mette with her match.
so soone as dioneus had ended his novell, madame lauretta also knew,that the conclusion of her regiment was come; whereupon, when thecounsell of canigiano had past with generall commendation, and the witof salabetto no lesse applauded, for fitting it with such aneffectuall prosecution; shee tooke the crowne of laurell from her ownehead, and set it upon madame aimilliaes, speaking graciously in thismanner. madam, i am not able to say, how pleasant a queene we shallhave of you, but sure i am, that we shall enjoy a faire one: letmatters therefore be so honourably ca.rried; that your governmentmay be answerable to your beautifull perfections; which words wereno sooner delivered, but she sate downe in her mounted seate.
madame aemillia being somewhat bashfull, not so much of hir beingcreated queene, as to heare her selfe thus publikely praysed, withthat which women do most of all desire: her face then appearing,like the opening of the damaske rose, in the goodlyest morning. butafter she had a while dejected her lookes, and the vermillion blushwas vanished away: having taken order with the master of the houshold,for all needefull occasions befitting the assembly, thus she began.
gracious ladies, wee behold it daily, that those oxen which havelaboured in the yoake most part of the day, for their moreconvenient feeding, are let forth at liberty, and permitted towander abroad in the woods. we see moreover, that gardens andorchards, being planted with variety of the fairest fruit trees, areequalled in beauty by woods and forrests, in the plentifull enjoyingof as goodly spreading branches. in consideration whereof,remembring how many dayes wee have already spent (under theseveritie of lawes imposed) shaping all our discourses to a forme ofobservation: i am of opinion, that it will not onely well become us,but also prove beneficiall for us, to live no longer under suchrestraint, and like enthralled people, desirous of liberty, wee shouldno more be subjected to the yoke, but recover our former strength inwalking freely.
wherefore, concerning our pastime purposed for to morrow, i am notminded to use any restriction, or tye you unto any particularordination: but rather do liberally graunt, that every one shalldevise and speake of arguments agreeing with your owne dispositions.
besides, i am verily perswaded, that variety of matter uttered sofreely, will be much more delightfull, then restraint to one kindeof purpose onely. which being thus granted by me, whosoever shalsucceede me in the government, may (as being of more power andpreheminence) restraine all backe againe to the accustomed lawes.and having thus spoken, she dispensed with their any longerattendance, untill it should be supper time.
every one commended the queenes appointment, allowing it torellish of good wit and judgement: and being all risen, fell to suchexercises as they pleased. the ladies made nosegaies and chaplets offlowers, the men played on their instruments, singing divers sweeteditties to them, and thus were busied untill supper time. which beeingcome, and they supping about the beautifull fountaine: after supper,they fell to singing and dauncing. in the end, the queene, toimitate the order of her predecessors, commanded pamphilus, thatnotwithstanding all the excellent songs formerly sung: he should nowsing one, whereunto dutifully obeying, thus he began.
the song
the chorus sung by all
love, i found such felicitie,
and joy, in thy captivitie:
as i before did never prove,
and thought me happy, being in love.
comfort abounding in my hart,
joy and delight
in soule and spright
i did possesse in every part;
o soveraigne love by thee.
thy sacred fires,
fed my desires,
and still aspires,
thy happy thrall to bee.
love, i found such felicity, etc.
my song wants power to relate,
the sweets of minde
which i did finde
in that most blissefull state,
o soveraigne love by thee.
no sad despaire,
or killing care
could me prepare;
still thou didst comfort me.
love, i found such felicity, etc.
i hate all such as do complaine,
blaspheming thee
with cruelty,
and sleights of coy disdaine.
o so raigne love, to mee
thou has bene kinde:
if others finde
thee worse inclinde,
yet i will honour thee.
love, i found such felicitie,
and joy in thy captivitie:
as i before did never prove,
but thought me happie, being in love.
thus the song of pamphilus ended, whereto all the rest (as a chorus)answered with their voyces, yet every one particularly (according asthey felt their love-sicke passions) made a curious constructionthereof, perhaps more then they needed, yet not divining whatpamphilus intended. and although they were transported with variety ofimaginations; yet none of them could arive at his true meaning indeed.wherefore the queene, perceiving the song to be fully ended, and theladies, as also the young gentlemen, willing to go take their rest:she commaunded them severally to their chambers.
the induction to the ninth day
whereon, under the government of madame aimilia, the argument of
each severall descourse, is not limitted to any one peculiar
subject: but every one remaineth at liberty, to
speak of whatsoever themselves best pleaseth
faire aurora, from whose bright and chearefull lookes, the duskiedarke night flyeth as an utter enemy, had already reached so high asthe eight heaven, converting it all into an azure colour, and thepretty flowrets beganne to spred open their leaves: when madameaemillia, beeing risen, caused all her female attendants, and the yonggentlemen likewise, to be summoned for. their personall appearance.who being all come, the queen leading the way, and they followingher majesticke pace, walked into a little wood, not farre offdistant from the palace.
where the queen, looking on madam philomena, gave her the honor ofbeginning the first novell for that day: whereto shee dutifullycondiscending, began as followeth.
the ninth day, the first novell
approving, that chaste and honest women, ought rather to deny
importunate suiters, by subtile and ingenious meanes,
then fall of scandall and slander
madame francesca, a widdow of pistoya, being affected by twoflorentine gentlemen, the one named rinuccio palermini, and theother alessandro chiarmontesi, and she bearing no good will toeyther of them; ingeniously freed her selfe from both theirimportunate suites. one of them she caused to lye as dead in agrave, and the other to fetch him from thence: so neither of themaccomplishing what they were enjoyned, fayled of obtaining his hopedexpectation.
madame, it can no way discontent mee (seeing it is your mostgracious pleasure) that i should have the honour, to breake thefirst staffe of freedome in this faire company (according to theinjunction of your majesty) for liberty of our own best likingarguments: wherein i dismay not (if i can speake well enough) but toplease you all as well, as any other that is to follow me. nor am i sooblivious (worthy ladies) but full well i remember, that many timeshath bene related in our passed demonstrations, how mighty andvariable the powers of love are: and yet i cannot be perswaded, thatthey have all bene so sufficiently spoken of, but something may beefurther added, and the bottome of them never dived into, although weshould sit arguing a whole yeare together. and because it hath beenealreadie approved, that lovers have bene led into divers accidents,not onely inevitable dangers of death, but also have entred into theverie houses of the dead, thence to convey their amorous friends: ipurpose to acquaint you with a novell, beside them which have benediscoursed; whereby you may not onely comprehend the power of love,but also the wisedome used by an honest gentlewoman, to rid herselfe of two importunate suiters, who loved her against her owneliking, yet neither of them knowing the others affection.
in the city of pistoya, there dwelt sometime a beautifullgentlewoman, being a widdow, whom two of our florentines (the onenamed rinuccio palermini, and the other alessandro chiarmontesi,having withdrawne themselves to pistoya) desperately affected, the oneignorant of the others intention, but each carrying his caseclosely, as hoping to be possessed of her. this gentlewoman, namedmadame francesca de lazzari, being often solicited by theirmessages, and troublesomely pestered with their importunities: at last(lesse advisedly then she intended) shee granted admittance to heareeither of them speake. which she repenting, and coveting to be ridof them both, a matter not easie to be done: she wittily devised theonely meanes, namely, to move such a motion to them, as neitherwould willingly undertake, yet within the compasse of possibility; butthey failing in the performance, shee might have the more honestoccasion, to bee free from all further mollestation by them, and herpolitike intention was thus projected.
on the same day, when she devised this peece of service, a man wasburied in pistoya, and in the church-yard belonging unto the grayfriars, who being descended of good and worthie parentage: yethimselfe was very infamous, and reputed to be the vilest man living,not onely there in pistoya, but throughout the whole world beside.moreover, while he lived, he had such a strange mishapen body, and hisface so ugly deformed, that such as knew him not, would stand gastlyaffrighted at the first sight of him. in regarde whereof, sheeconsidered with her selfe, that the foule deformitie of this loathedfellow, would greatly avayle in her determination, and consulting withher chamber-maid, thus she spake.
thou knowest (my most true and faithfull servant) what trouble andaffliction of minde i suffer dayly, by the messages and letters of thetwo florentines, rinuccio and alessandro, how hatefull theirimportunity is to me, as being utterly unwilling to hear themspeake, or yeeld to any thing which they desire. wherefore, to free myselfe from them both together, i have devised (in regard of theirgreat and liberall offers) to make trial of them in such a matter,as i am assured they will never performe.
it is not unknowne to thee, that in the church-yard of the grayfriars, and this instant morning, scannadio (for so was the uglyfellow named) was buried; of whom, when he was living, as also nowbeing dead, both men, women, and children, doe yet stand in feare,so gastly and dreadfull alwayes was his personall appearance to them.
wherefore, first of all go thou to alessandro, and say to himthus. my mistris francesca hath sent me to you, to tell you, thatnow the time is come, wherein you may deserve to enjoy her love, andgaine the possession of her person, if you will accomplish such amotion as she maketh to you. for some especiall occasion, wherewithhereafter you shall bee better acquainted, a neere kinsman of hers,must needs have the body of scannadio (who was buried this morning)brought to her house. and she, being as much affraid of him now heis dead, as when he was living, by no meanes would have his bodybrought thither.
in which respect, as a token of your unfeigned love to her, andthe latest service you shall ever do for her: shee earnestlyentreateth you, that this night, in the very deadest time thereof, youwould go to the grave, where scannadio lyeth yet uncovered withearth untill to morrow, and attyring your selfe in his garments,even as if you were the man himselfe, so to remaine there untill herkinsman doe come.
then, without speaking any one word, let him take you foorth ofthe grave, and bring you thence (insted of scannadio) to hir house:where she will give you gentle welcome, and disappoint her kinsmanin his hope, by making you lord of her, and all that is hers, asafterward shall plainly appeare. if he say he wit do it, it is as muchas i desire: but if hee trifle and make deniall, then boldly tell him,that he must refraine all places wheresoever i am, and forbeare tosend me any more letters, or messages.
having done so, then repaire to rinuccio palermini, and say. mymistresse francesca is ready to make acceptance of your love;provided, that you will do one thing for her sake. namely, thisensuing night, in the midst and stillest season thereof, to go tothe grave where scannadio was this morning buried, and (without makingany noise) or speaking one word, whatsoever you shall heare or see: totake him forth of the grave, and bring him home to her house, wher youshal know the reason of this strange businesse, and enjoy her freelyas your owne for ever. but if he refuse to do it, then i commaund him,never hereafter to see me, or move further suite unto mee, by anymeanes whatsoever.
the chamber-maide went to them both, and delivered the severallmessages from her mistresse, according as she had given her in charge;whereunto each of them answered, that they woulde (for her sake) notonely descend into a grave, but also into hell, if it were herpleasure.
she returning with this answer unto her mistresse, francescaremained in expectation, what the issue of these fond attemptes inthem, would sort unto. when night was come, and the middle hourethereof already past, alessandro chiarmontesi, having put off allother garments to his doublet and hose; departed secretly from hislodging, walking towards the church-yard, where scannadio lay in hisgrave: but by the way as he went, hee became surprized with diversdreadfull conceites and imaginations, and questioned with himselfethus.
what a beast am i? what a businesse have i undertaken? and whitheram i going? what do i know, but that the kinsman unto this woman,perhappes understanding mine affection to her, and crediting some suchmatter, as is nothing so: hath laide this politicke traine for me,that he may murther me in the grave? which (if it should so happen) mylife is lost, and yet the occasion never knowne whereby it was done.or what know i, whether some secret enemy of mine (affecting her inlike manner, as i do) have devised this stratagem (out of malice)against mee, to draw my life in danger, and further his owne goodfortune? then, contrary motions, overswaying these suspitions, hequestioned his thoughts in another nature.
let me (quoth he) admit the case, that none of these surmises areintended, but her kinsman (by and in this manner devised) must bringme into her house: i am not therefore perswaded, that he or they docovet, to have the body of scannadio, either to carry it thither, orpresent it to her, but rather do aime at some other end. may not iconjecture, that my close murthering is purposed, and this wayacted, as on him that (in his life time) had offended them? the maidhath straitly charged me, that whatsoever is said or done unto me, iam not to speake a word. what if they pul out mine eies, teare outmy teeth, cut off my hands, or do me any other mischiefe: where am ithen? shall all these extremities barre me of speaking? on the otherside, if i speake, then i shall be knowne, and so much the sooner(perhaps) be abused. but admit that i sustaine no injurie at all, asbeing guilty of no transgression: yet (perchance) i shall not becarried to her house, but to some other baser place, and afterward sheshall reprove me, that i did not accomplish what shee commanded, andso all my labour is utterly lost.
perplexed with these various contradicting opinions, he waswilling divers times to turne home backe againe: yet such was theviolence of his love, and the power thereof prevailing against allsinister arguments; as he went to the grave, and removing theboordes covering it, whereinto he entred; and having despoiledscannadio of his garments, cloathed himselfe with them, and so laidhim down, having first covered the grave againe. not long had heetarryed there, but he began to bethinke him, what manner of manscannadio was, and what strange reports had bene noised of him, notonely for ransacking dead mens graves in the night season, but manyother abhominable villanies committed by him, which so fearfullyassaulted him; that his haire stoode on end, every member of himquaked, and every minute he imagined scannadio rising, with intentto strangle him in the grave. but his fervent affection overcoming allthese idle feares, and lying stone still, as if he had beene thedead man indeede; he remained to see the end of his hope.
on the contrary side, after midnight was past, rinuccio palerminideparted from his lodging, to do what hee was enjoyned by his heartsmistresse, and as hee went along, divers considerations also ran inhis minde, concerning occasions possible to happen. as, falling intothe hands of justice, with the body of scannadio upon his backe, andbeing condemned for sacriledge, in robbing graves of the dead;either to be burned, or otherwise so punished, as might make himhatefull to his best friends, and meerely a shame to himselfe.
many other the like conceits mollested him, sufficient to alterhis determination: but affection was much more prevayling in him,and made him use this consultation. how now rinuccio? wilt dare todeny the first request, being mooved to thee by a gentlewoman, whomthou dearly lovest, and is the onely meanes, whereby to gaineassurance of her gracious favour? undoubtedly, were i sure to die inthe attempt, yet i will accomplish my promise. and so he went onwith courage to the grave.
alessandro hearing his arrivall, and also the removall of the bords,although he was exceedingly affraid; yet he lay quietly stil, andstirred not, and rinuccio beeing in the grave, tooke alessandro by thefeete, haling him forth, and (mounting him uppon his backe) went onthus loden, towards the house of madam francesca. as he passed alongthe streets, unseene or unmet by any, alessandro suffered manyshrewd rushings and punches, by turnings at the streets corners, andjolting against bulkes, poasts, and stalles, which rinuccio couldnot avoyd, in regard the night was so wonderfully darke, as heecould not see which way he went.
being come somewhat neere to the gentlewomans house, and shestanding readie in the window with her maide, to see when rinuccioshould arrive there with alessandro, provided also of an apt excuse,to send them thence like a couple of coxcombes; it fortuned, thatthe watchmen, attending there in the same streete, for theapprehension of a banished man, stolne into the city contrarie toorder; hearing the trampling of rinuccioes feete, directed theircourse as they heard the noise, having their lanthorne and lightclosely covered, to see who it should be, and what he intended, andbeating their weapons against the ground, demanded, who goes there?rinuccio knowing their voyces, and that now was no time for any longdeliberation: let fall alessandro, and ran away as fast as his legscould carry him.
alessandro being risen againe (although he was cloathed inscannadioes garments, which were long and too bigge for him) fleddeaway also as rinuccio did. all which madame francesca easily discernedby helpe of the watchmens lanthorne, and how rinuccio carriedalessandro on his backe, beeing attired in the garments ofscannadio: whereat she mervailed not a litle, as also the greatboldnesse of them both. but in the midst of her mervailing, shelaughed very heartily, when she saw the one let the other fall, andboth to runne away so manfully. which accident pleasing her beyond allcomparison, and applauding her good fortune, to bee so happilydelivered from their daily mollestation: she betooke her selfe tohir chamber with the maide, avouching solemnly to her, that(questionlesse) they both affected her dearely, having undertaken sucha straunge imposition, and verie neere brought it to a finallconclusion.
rinuccio, being sadly discontented, and curssing his hard fortune,would not yet returne home to his lodging: but, when the watch wasgone forth of that streete, came backe to the place where he letfall alessandro, purposing to accomplish the rest of his enterprize.but not finding the body, and remaining fully perswaded, that thewatchmen were possessed thereof; hee went away, greeving extreamly.and alessandro, not knowing now what should become of him:confounded with the like griefe and sorrow, that all his hope was thusutterly overthrowne, retired thence unto his owne house, not knowingwho was the porter which carried him.
the next morning, the grave of scannadio being found open, and thebody not in it, because alessandro had thrown it into a deep ditchneere adjoyning: all the people of pistoya were possessed withsundry opinions, some of the more foolish sort verily beleeving,that the divell had caried away the dead body. neverthelesse, eachof the lovers severally made knowne to madam francesca, what he haddone, and how disappointed, either excusing himselfe, that thoughher command had not bin fully accomplished, yet to continue her favourtowards him. but she, like a wise and discreet gentlewoman, seemingnot to credit either the one or other: discharged her selfe honestlyof them both, with a cutting answere, that shee would never(afterward) expect any other service from them, because they hadfayled in their first injunction.
the ninth day, the second novell
whereby is declared, that whosoever is desirous to reprehend
sinne in other men, should first examine himselfe, that he
be not guiltie of the same crime
madame usimbalda, lady abbesse of a monastery of nuns inlombardie, arising hastily in the night time without a candle, to takeone of her daughter nunnes in bed with a yong gentleman, whereof shewas enviously accused, by certaine of her other sisters: the abbesseher selfe (being at the same time in bed with a priest) imagining tohave put on her head her plaited vayle, put on the priests breeches.which when the poore nunne perceyved; by causing the abbesse to seeher owne error, she got her selfe to be absolved, and had the freerliberty afterward, to be more familiar with her frend, then formerlyshe had bin.
by this time, madame philomena sate silent, and the wit offrancesca, in freeing her selfe from them whom she could not fancie,was generally commended: as also on the contrary, the bold presumptionof the two amorous suiters, was reputed not to be love, but meerelyfolly. and then the queene, with a gracious admonition, gave way formadam eliza to follow next; who presently thus began.
worthy ladies, madame francesca delivered her selfe discreetlyfrom trouble, as already hath bin related: but a yong nun, by thehelpe and favour of fortune, did also free her selfe (in speakingadvisedly) from an inconvenience sodainly falling on her. and as youwell know, there wants none of them, who (like bold bayards) will bevery forward in checking other mens misdemeanors, when themselves,as my novell will approve, deserve more justly to bee corrected. ashapned to a lady abbesse, under whose governement the same young nunnewas, of whom i am now to speake.
you are then to understand (gracious auditors) that in lombardiethere was a goodly monastery, very famous for holinesse andreligion, where, among other sanctified sisters, there was a yonggentlewoman, endued with very singular beautie, being namedisabella, who on a day, when a kinsman of hers came to see her atthe grate, became enamored of a young gentleman, being then in hiscompany.
he likewise, beholding her to be so admirably beautifull, andconceyving by the pretty glances of her eye, that they appeared to beesilent intelligencers of the hearts meaning, grew also asaffectionately inclined towards her, and this mutuall love continuedthus concealed a long while, but not without great affliction untothem both. in the end, either of them being circumspect andprovident enough, the gentleman contrived a meanes, whereby he mightsecretly visite his nunne, wherewith she seemed no way discontented:and this visitation was not for once or twice, but verie often, andclosely concealed to themselves.
at length it came to passe, that either through their owneindiscreete carriage, or jelous suspition in some others: it wasespied by one of the sisters, both the gentlemans comming anddeparting, yet unknowne to him or isabella. the saide sister,disclosing the same to two or three more: they agreed together, toreveale it to the lady abbesse, who was named madame usimbalda, a holyand devout lady, in common opinion of all the nunnes, and whosoeverelse knew her.
they further concluded (because isabella should not deny theyraccusation) to contrive the businesse so cunningly: that the ladleabbesse should come her selfe in person, and take the yong gentlemanin bed with the nun. and uppon this determination, they agreed towatch nightly by turnes, because by no meanes they wold beprevented: so to surprise poore isabella, who beeing ignorant of theirtreachery, suspected nothing. presuming thus still on this secretfelicitie, and fearing no disaster to befall her: it chaunced (on anight) that the yong gentleman being entred into the nuns dorter,the scowts had descried him, and intended to be revenged on her.
after some part of the night was overpast, they divided themselvesinto two bands, one to guard isabellaes dorter doore, the other tocarry newes to the abbesse, and knocking at her closet doore, saide.rise quickely madame, and use all the hast you may, for we haveseene a man enter our sister isabellaes dorter, and you may take herin bed with him. the lady abbesse, who (the very same night) had thecompany of a lusty priest in bed with her selfe, as oftentimesbefore she had, and he being alwayes brought thither in a chest:hearing these tidings, and fearing also, lest the nunnes hastieknocking at her doore, might cause it to fly open, and so (by theirentrance) have her owne shame discovered: arose very hastily, andthinking she had put on her plaited vaile, which alwayes she walkedwith in the night season, and used to tearme her psalter; she putthe priests breeches upon her head, and so went away in all hastwith them, supposing them verily to be her psalter: but making fastthe closet doore with her keye, because the priest should not bediscovered.
away shee went in all haste with the sisters, who were so forward inthe detection of poore isabella, as they never regarded what manner ofvaile the lady abbesse wore on her head. and being come to thedorter doore, quickly they lifted it off from the hookes, and beingentred, found the two lovers sweetly imbracing: but yet so amazed atthis sudden surprisall, as they durst not stirre, nor speake one word.the young nunne isabella, was raised forthwith by the other sisters,and according as the abbesse had comanded, was brought by them intothe chapter-house: the yong gentleman remaining still in thechamber, where he put on his garments, awaiting to see the issue ofthis businesse, and verily intending to act severe revenge on hisbetrayers, if any harme were done to isabella, and afterward to takeher thence away with him, as meaning to make her amends by marriage.
the abbesse being seated in the chapter house, and all the othernunnes then called before her, who minded nothing else but the pooreoffending sister: she began to give her very harsh and vilespeeches, as never any transgressor suffered the like, and as to herwho had (if it should be openly knowne abroad) contaminated by herlewde life and actions, the sanctity and good renowne of the wholemonastery, and threatned her with very severe chastisement. pooreisabella, confounded with feare and shame, as being no way able toexcuse her fault, knew not what answer to make, but standing silent,made her case compassionable to all the rest, even thosehard-hearted sisters which betrayed her.
and the abbesse still continuing her harsh speeches, it fortuned,that isabella raising her head, which before she dejected into hirbosome, espied the breeches on her head, with the stockings hanging oneither side of her; the sight whereof did so much encourage her,that boldly she said. madam, let a poore offender advise you for tomend your veile, and afterward say to me what you will.
the abbesse being very angry; and not understanding what shemeant, frowningly answered. why how now saucy companion? what vaileare you prating of? are you so malapert, to bee chatting already? isthe deed you have done, to be answered in such immodest manner?isabella not a jot danted by her sterne behaviour, once againe said.good madam let me perswade you to sette your vaile right, and thenchide me as long as you will. at these words, all the rest of thenunnes exalted their lookes, to behold what vaile the abbesse woreon her head, wherewith isabella should finde such fault, and she herselfe lift up her hand to feele it: and then they all perceyvedplainly, the reason of isabellas speeches, and the abbesse saw herowne error.
hereupon, when the rest observed, that she had no help to cloud thispalpable shame withall, the tide began to turne, and hir tonguefound another manner of language, then her former fury to pooreisabella, growing to this conclusion, that it is impossible toresist against the temptations of the flesh. and therefore shesaide: let all of you take occasion, according as it offereth itselfe, as both we and our predecessors have done: to be providentfor your selves, take time while you may, having this sentence alwaiesin remembrance, si non caste, tamen caute.
so, having granted the yong nunne isabella free absolution: the ladyabbesse returned backe againe to bed to the priest, and isabella tothe gentleman. as for the other sisters, who (as yet) were without thebenefit of friends; they intended to provide themselves so soone asthey could, being enduced thereto by so good example.
the ninth day, the third novell
discovering the simplicity of some silly witted men, and how
easie a matter it is to abuse and beguile them
master simon the physitian, by the perswasions of bruno, buffalmaco,and a third companion, named nello, made calandrino to beleeve, thathe was conceived great with childe. and having physicke ministred tohim for the disease: they got both good fatte capons and money of him,and so cured him, without any other man of deliverance.
after that madame eliza had concluded her novell, and every one ofthe company given thankes to fortune, for delivering poore isabellathe faire young nunne, from the bitter reprehensions of the asfaulty abbesse, as also the malice of her envious sisters; thequeene gave command unto philostratus, that he should be the next inorder, and hee (without expecting anie other warning) began in thismanner.
faire ladies, the paltry judge of the marquisate, whereofyesterday i made relation to you; hindred mee then of anothernovell, concerning silly calandrino, wherewith i purpose now toacquaint you. and because whatsoever hath already bin spoken of him,tended to no other end but matter of meriment, hee and hiscompanions duly considered; the novel which i shal now report, keepethwithin the selfesame compasse, and aimeth also at your contentment,according to the scope of imposed variety.
you have already heard what manner of man calandrino was, andlikewise the rest of his pleasant companions, who likewise are nowagaine to be remembred, because they are actors in our presentdiscourse. it came so to passe, that an aunt of calandrinoes dying,left him a legacy of two hundred florines, wherewith he purposed topurchase some small farme-house in the countrey, or else to enlargethe other, whereof he was possessed already. and, as if bee were todisburse some ten thousand florines, there was not a broker in allflorence, but understood what he intended to doe: and all the worstwas, that the strings of his purse could stretch no higher. bruno, andbuffalmaco (his auncient confederates) who heard of this goodfortune befalne him, advised him in such manner as they were wont todo; allowing it much better for him, to make merrie with the moneyin good cheare among them, then to lay it out in paltry land,whereto he would not by any meanes listen, but ridde himselfe ofthem with a dinners cost, as loath to bee at anie further chargewith them.
these merry laddes meant not to leave him so; but sitting one day inserious consultation, and a third man in their companie, namednello; they all three layde their braines in steep, by what means towash their mouths well, and calandrino to bee at the cost thereof.
and having resolved what was to bee done, they met togither the nextmorning, even as calandrino was comming foorth of his house, andsundering themselves, to avoyd all suspition, yet beeing not farredistant each from other; nello first met him, and saide unto him, goodmorrow calandrino: which he requited backe agayne with the samesalutation. but then nello standing still, looked him stedfastly inthe face: whereat calandrino mervailing, sayd. nello.
why dost thou behold me so advisedly? whereunto nello answered,saying hast thou felt any paine this last night past? thou lookestnothing so well, as thou didst yesterday. calandrino began instantlyto wax doubtfull, and replyed thus. dost thou see any alteration in myface, whereby to imagine, i should feele some paine? in good faithcalandrino (quoth nello) me thinks thy countenance is strangelychanged, and surely it proceedeth from some great cause, and so hedeparted away from him.
calandrino being very mistrustfull, scratched his head, yet felte heno grievance at all; and going still on; buffalmaco sodainelyencountred him, upon his departure from nello, and after salutationspassing betweene them; in a manner of admiration, demanded what heayled?
truly (quoth calandrino) well enough to mine owne thinking, yetnotwithstanding, i met with nello but even now; and he told me, thatmy countenance was very much altred; is it possible that i shouldbee sicke, and feele no paine or distaste in any part of me?buffalmaco answered; i am not so skilfull in judgement, as to argue onthe nature of distemper in the body: but sure i am, that thou hastsome daungerous inward impediment, because thou lookst (almost) like aman more then halfe dead.
calandrino began presently to shake, as if hee had had a feaverhanging on him, and then came bruno looking fearefully on him, andbefore he would utter any words, seemed greatly to bemoane him, sayingat length. calandrino? art thou the same man, or no? how wonderfulyart thou changed since last i saw thee, which is no longer then yesterday? i pray thee tell mee, how dooest thou feele thy health?
calandrino hearing, that they all agreed in one opinion of him; hebeganne verily to perswade himselfe, that some sodaine sicknes, hadseised upon him, which they could discerne, although hee felt noanguish at all: and therefore, like a man much perplexed in minde,demanded of them, what he should do? beleeve me calandrino (answeredbruno) if i were worthy to give thee counsell, thou shouldst returnehome presently to thy house, and lay thee downe in thy warme bedde,covered with so many cloathes as thou canst well endure. then tomorrow morning, send thy water unto learned mayster doctor thephysitian, who (as thou knowest) is a man of most singular skill andexperience: he will instruct thee presently what is the best course tobe taken, and we that have ever beene thy loving friends, will notfaile thee in any thing that lieth in our power.
by this time, nello being come againe unto them, they all returnedhome with calandrino unto his owne house, whereinto he entering veryfaintly, hee saide to his wife: woman, make my bed presently ready,for i feele my selfe to be growne extreamely sicke, and see thatthou layest cloathes enow upon me. being thus laide in his bedde, theyleft him for that night, and returned to visite him againe the verienext morning, by which time, he had made a reservation of his water,and sent it by a young damosell unto maister doctor, who dwelt then inthe olde market place, at the signe of the muske mellone. then saidebruno unto his companions; abide you heere to keepe him company, and iwill walke along to the physitian, to understand what he will say: andif neede be, i can procure him to come hither with me. calandrino verykindely accepted his offer, saying withall. well bruno, thou shewstthy selfe a friend in the time of necessity, i pray thee know ofhim, how the case stands with me, for i feele a very strangealteration within mee, far beyond all compasse of my conceite.
bruno being gone to the physitian, he made such expedition, thathe arrived there before the damosell, who carried the water, andinformed master simon with the whole tricke intended: wherefore,when the damosell was come, and hee had passed his judgementconcerning the water, he said to her.
maide, go home againe, and tell calandrino, that he must keephimselfe very warme: and i my selfe will instantly be with him, toenstruct him further in the quality of his sicknesse.
the damosell delivered her message accordingly, and it was notlong before mayster doctor simon came, with bruno also in his company,and sitting downe on the beds side by calandrino, hee began to tastehis pulse, and within a small while after, his wife being come intothe chamber, he said. observe me well calandrino, for i speake to theein the nature of a true friend; thou hast no other disease, but onlythou art great with child.
so soone as calandrino heard these words, in dispairing manner hebeganne to rage, and cry out aloud, saying to his wife ah thouwicked woman, this is long of thee, and thou hast done me thismischeefe for alwayes thou wilt be upon me, ever railing at mee, andfighting, untill thou hast gotten me under thee. say thou divellishcreature, do i not tell thee true? the woman, being of verie honestand civill conversation, hearing her husband speake so foolishly:blushing with shame, and hanging downe her head in bashfull manner;without returning any answer, went forth of her chamber.
calandrino continuing still in his angry humour, wringing his hands,and beating them upon his breast, said: wretched man that i am, whatshall i do? how shal i be delivered of this child? which way can itcome from me into the world? i plainly perceyve, that i am noneother then a dead man, and all through the wickednesse of my wife:heaven plague her with as many mischiefes, as i am desirous to findeease. were i now in as good health, as heere-tofore i have beene, iwould rise out of my bed, and never cease beating her, untill i hadbroken her in a thousand peeces. but if fortune will be sofavourable to me, as to helpe mee out of this dangerous agony: hangme, if ever she get me under her againe, or make me such an asse, inhaving the mastery over mee, as diuers times she hath done.
bruno, buffalmaco and nello, hearing these raving speeches ofcalandrino, were swolne so bigge with laughter, as if their ribbeswould have burst in sunder; neverthelesse, they abstained so well asthey were able; but doctor simon gaped so wide with laughing as onemight easily have pluckt out all his teeth. in the end, because hecould tarry there no longer, but was preparing to depart: calandrinothanked him for his paines, requesting that hee would be carefull ofhim, in aiding him with his best advise and counsell, and he would notbe unmindfull of him. honest neighbour calandrino, answered thephisition, i would not have you to torment your selfe, in such animpatient and tempestuous manner, because i perceive the time so tohasten on, as we shall soone perceive (and that within very fewdayes space) your health well restored, and without the sense ofmuch paine; but indeed it wil cost expences. alas sir, saidcalandrino, mak not any spare of my purse, to procure that i mayhave safe deliverance. i have two hundred florines, lately falne to meby the death of mine aunt, wherewith i intended to purchase a farme inthe countrey: take them all if need be, onely reserving some few formy lying in childbed. and then master doctor, alas, i know not howto behave my selfe, for i have heard the grievous complaint of womenin that case, oppressed with bitter pangs and throwes; asquestionlesse they will bee my death, except you have the greater careof me.
be of good cheere neighbour calandrino, replyed doctor simon, i willprovide an excellent distilled drinke for you, marveilously pleasingin taste, and of soveraigne vertue, which will resolve all in threemornings, making you as whole and as sound as a fish newly spawned.but you must have an especiall care afterward, being providently wise,least you fall into the like follies againe. concerning thepreparation of this precious drinke, halfe a dozen of capons, the veryfairest and fattest, i must make use of in the distillation: whatother things shall bee imployed beside, you may deliver forty florinesto one of these your honest friends, to see all the necessaries boughtand sent me home to my house. concerning my businesse, make you nodoubt thereof, for i will have all distilled against to morrow, andthen doe you drinke a great glasse full every morning, fresh andfasting next your heart. calandrino was highly pleased with his words,returning master doctor infinite thankes, and referring all to hisdisposing. and having given forty florines to bruno, with othermoney beside, to buy the halfe dozen of capons: he thought himselfegreatly beholding to them all, and protested to requite theirkindenesse.
master doctor being gone home to his house, made ready a bottel ofvery excellent hypocrasse, which he sent the next day according to hispromise: and bruno having bought the capons, with other junkets, fitfor the turne, the phisitian and his merry companions, fed on themhartely for the givers sake. as for calandrino, he liked his dyetdrinke excellently well, quaffing a large glassefull off threemornings together: afterward master doctor and the rest came to seehim, and having felt his pulse, the phisition said. calandrino, thouart now as sound in health, as any man in all florence can be: thouneedest not to keepe within doores any longer, but walke abroadboldly, for all is well and the childe gone.
calandrino arose like a joyfull man, and walked daily through thestreets, in the performance of such affaires as belonged to him: andevery acquaintance he met withall, he told the condition of his suddensickenesse; and what a rare cure master doctor simon had wrought onhim, delivering him (in three dayes space) of a childe, and withoutthe feeling of any paine. bruno, buffalmaco, and nello, were not alittle jocond, for meeting so well with covetous calandrino: but howthe wife liked the folly of her husband, i leave to the judgement ofall good women.
the ninth day, the fourth novell
serving as an admonition to all men, for taking gamesters
and drunkards into their service
francesco fortarigo, played away all that he had at buonconvento,and likewise the money of francesco aniolliero, being his master. thenrunning after him in his shirt, and avouching that hee had robbed him:he caused him to be taken by pezants of the country, clothedhimselfe in his masters wearing garments, and (mounted on his horse)rode thence to sienna, leaving aniolliero in his shirt, and walkedbarefooted.
the ridiculous words given by calandrino to his wife, all thewhole company hartily laughed at: but a philostratus ceassing,madame neiphila (as it pleased the queene to appoint) began tospeake thus. vertuous ladies, if it were not more hard and uneasie formen, to make good their understanding and vertue, then apparantpublication of their disgrace and folly; many would not labour invaine, to curbe in their idle speeches with a bridle, as you havemanifestly observed by the weake wit of calandrino. who needed no suchfantastick circumstance, to cure the strange disease, which heimagined (by sottish perswasions) to have: had hee not been solavish of his tongue, and accused his wife of overmastering him. whichmaketh me remember a novell, quite contrary to this last related,namely, how one man may strive to surmount another in malice; yet heto sustaine the greater harme, that had (at the first) the mostadvantage of his enemy, as i will presently declare unto you.
there dwelt in sienna, and not many yeeres since, two young men ofequall age, both of them bearing the name of francesco: but the onewas descended of the aniollieri, and the other likewise of thefortarigi; so that they were commonly called aniolliero, andfortarigo, both gentlemen, and well derived. now, although in manyother matters, their complexions did differ very much: yetnotwithstanding, they varied not in one bad qualitie, namely too greatneglect of their fathers, which caused their more frequentconversation, as very familiar and respective friends. butaniolliero (being a very goodly and faire conditioned young gentleman)apparently perceiving, that he could not maintaine himselfe at sienna,in such estate as he liked, and upon the pension allowed him by hisfather, hearing also, that at the marquisate of ancona, there livedthe popes legate, a worthy cardinall, his much indeared good lordand friend: he intended to goe visite him, as hoping to advance hisfortunes by him.
having acquainted his father with this determination, he concludedwith him, to have that from him in a moment which might supply hiswants because he would be clothed gallantly, and mounted honourably.and seeking for a servant necessary to attend on him, it chancedthat fortarigo hearing thereof, came presently to aniolliero,intreating him in the best manner he could, to let him waite on him ashis serving man, promising both dutiful and diligent attendance: yetnot to deaund any other wages, but onely payment of his ordinaryexpences. aniolliero made him answere, that he durst not give himentertainment, not in regard of his insufficiency, and unaptnessefor service: but because he was a great gamester, and divers timeswould be beastly drunke? whereto fortarigo replyed that hee wouldrefraine from both those foule vices, and addict all his endeavorwholly to please him, without just taxation of any grosse errour;making such solemne vowes and protestations beside, as conqueredaniolliero, and won his consent.
being entred upon his journey, and arriving in a morning atbuonconvento, there aniolliero determined to dine, and afterward,finding the heate to be unfit for travaile; he caused a bed to beprepared, wherein being laid to rest by the helpe of fortarigo, hegave him charge, that after the heates violence was overpast, heeshould not faile to call and awake him. while aniolliero slept thus inhis bed, fortarigo, never remembring his solemne vowes and promises:went to the taverne, where having drunke indifferently, and findingcompany fit for the purpose, he fell to play at the dice with them. ina very short while, he had not onely lost his money, but all thecloathes on his backe likewise, and coveting to recover his lossesagaine; naked in his shirt, he went to aniollieroes chamber, wherefinding him yet soundly sleeping, he tooke all the money he had in hispurse, and then returned backe to play, speeding in the same manner ashee did before, not having one poore penny left him.
aniolliero chancing to awake, arose and made him ready, withoutany servant to helpe him; then calling for fortarigo, and nothearing any tydings of him: he began immediately to imagine, that hewas become drunke, and so had falne asleepe in one place or other,as very often he was wont to doe. wherefore, determining so to leavehim, he caused the male and saddle to be set on his horse, and so tofurnish himselfe with a more honest servant at corsignano.
but when hee came to pay his hoste, hee found not any penny lefthim: whereupon (as well he might) he grew greatly offended, and raisedmuch trouble in the house, charged the hoasts people to have robdehim, and threatening to have them sent as prisoners to sienna.suddenly entred fortarigo in his shirt, with intent to have stolneaniollieroes garments, as formerly hee did the money out of his purse,and seeing him ready to mount on horsebacke, hee saide.
how now aniolliero? what shall we goe away so soone? i pray yousir tarry a little while, for an honest man is comming hither, whohath my doublet engaged for eight and thirty shillings; and i amsure that he will restore it me back for five and thirty, if i couldpresently pay him downe the money.
during the speeches, an other entred among them, who assuredaniolliero, that fortarigo was the thiefe which robde him of hismoney, shewing him also how much hee had lost at the dice: wherewithaniolliero being much mooved, very angerly reprooved fortarigo, and,but for feare of the law, would have offered him outrage, thretning tohave him hangd by the neck, or else condemned to the gallies belongingto florence, and so mounted on his horse. fortarigo making shew to thestanders by, as if aniolliero menaced some other body, and not him,said. come aniolliero, i pray thee let us leave this frivilousprating, for (indeede) it is not worth a button, and minde a matter ofmore importance: my doublet will bee had againe for five and thirtyshillings, if the money may bee tendered downe at this very instant,whereas if we deferre it till to morrow, perhaps hee will then havethe whole eight and thirty which he lent me, and he doth me thispleasure, because i am ready (at another time) to affoord him the likecourtesie; why then should we loose three shillings, when they mayso easily be saved.
aniolliero hearing him speake in such confused manner, andperceiving also, that they which stood gazing by, beleeved (as bytheir lookes appeared) that fortarigo had not played away hismasters mony at the dice, but rather that he had some stocke offortarigoes in his custody; angerly answered; thou sawcy companion,what have i to doe with thy doublet? i would thou wert hangd, not onlyfor playing away my money, but also by delaying thus my journey, andyet boldly thou standest out-facing mee, as if i were no better thenthy fellow. fortarigo held on still his former behaviour, withoutusing any respect or reverence to aniolliero, as if all theaccusations did not concerne him, but saying, why should wee nottake the advantage of three shillings profit? thinkest thou, that i amnot able to doe as much for thee? why, lay out so much money for mysake, and make no more haste then needs we must, because we haveday-light enough to bring us (before night) to torreniero. come,draw thy purse, and pay the money, for upon mine honest word, i mayenquire throughout all sienna, and yet not find such another doubletas this of mine is. to say then, that i should leave it, where itnow lyeth pawned, and for eight and thirty shillings, when it isrichly more worth then fifty, i am sure to suffer a doubleendammagement thereby.
you may well imagine, that aniolliero was now enraged beyond allpatience, to see himselfe both robde of his money, and overbornewith presumptuous language: wherefore, without making any morereplications, he gave the spurre to his horse, and rode away towardstorreniero. now fell fortarigo into a more knavish intention againstaniolliero, and being very speedy in running, followed apace after himin his shirt, crying out still aloude to him all the way, to let himhave his doublet againe. aniolliero riding on very fast, to free hiseares from this idle importunity, it fortuned that fortarigo espieddivers countrey pezants, laboring in the fields about their businesse,and by whom aniolliero (of necessity) must passe: to them he cryed outso loude as he could; stay the thiefe, stop the thiefe, he ridesaway so fast, having robde me.
they being provided, some with prongges, pitchforkes and spades, andothers with the like weapons fit for husbandry, stept into the waybefore aniolliero: and beleeving undoubtedly, that he had robde theman which pursued him in his shirt, stayed and apprehended him.whatsoever aniolliero could doe or say, prevailed not any thing withthe unmannerly clownes, but when fortarigo was arrived among them,he braved aniolliero most impudently, saying.
what reason have i to spoyle thy life (thou traiterous villaine)to rob and spoyle thy master thus on the high way? then turning to thecountrey boores: how much deare friends (quoth he) am i beholding toyou for this unexpected kindnesse? you behold in what manner he leftme in my lodging, having first playd away all my money at the dice,and then deceiving me of my horse and garments also: but had not you(by great good lucke) thus holpe mee to stay him; a poore gentlemanhad bin undone for ever, and i should never have found him againe.
aniolliero avouched the truth of his wrong received, but the basepeazants, giving credite onely to fortarigoes lying exclamations:tooke him from his horse, despoyled him of all his wearingapparrell, even to the very bootes from off his legges: suffered himto ride away from him in that manner, and aniolliero left so in hisshirt, to dance a bare foote galliard after him either towards sienna,or any place else.
thus aniolliero, purposing to visite his cousin the cardinal likea gallant, and at the marquisate of ancona, returned backe poorly inhis shirt unto buonconvento, and durst not (for shame) repaire tosienna. in the end, he borrowed money on the other horse whichfortarigo rode on, and remained there in the inne, whence riding tocorsignano, where he had divers kinsmen and friends, he continuedthere so long with them, till he was better furnished from his father.
thus you may perceive, that the cunning villanies of fortarigo,hindred the honest intended enterprise of aniolliero howbeit in fittime and place, nothing afterward was left unpunished.
the ninth day, the fift novell
in just reprehension of those vaineheaded fooles, that are
led and governed by idle perswasions
calandrino became extraordinarily enamoured of a young damosell,named nicholetta. bruno prepared a charme or writing for him,avouching constantly to him, that so soone as he touched thedamosell therewith, she should follow him whithersoever hee would haveher. she being gone to an appointed place with him, hee was foundthere by his wife, and dealt withall according to his deserving.
because the novell reported by madame neiphila was so sooneconcluded, without much laughter, or commendation of the wholecompany: the queene turned hir selfe towards madam fiammetta,enjoyning her to succeed in apt order; and she being as ready assodainly commanded, began as followeth. most gentle ladies, i amperswaded of your opinion in judgement with mine, that there is notany thing, which can bee spoken pleasingly, except it beconveniently suited with apt time and place: in which respect, whenladies and gentlewomen are bent to discoursing, the due election ofthem both are necessarily required. and therefore i am not unmindfull,that our meeting heere (ayming at nothing more, then to outweare thetime with our generall contentment) should tye us to the course of ourpleasure and recreation, to the same conveniency of time and place;not sparing, though some have bin nominated oftentimes in our passedarguments; yet, if occasion serve, and the nature of variety be wellconsidered, wee may speake of the selfesame persons againe.
now, notwithstanding the actions of calandrino have beeneindifferently canvazed among us; yet, remembring what philostratus notlong since saide, that they intended to nothing more then matter ofmirth: i presume the boldlier, to report another novell of him, besidethem already past. and, were i willing to conceale the truth, andcloath it in more circumstantiall maner: i could make use ofcontrary names, and paint it in a poeticall fiction, perhaps moreprobable, though not so pleasing. but because wandring from thetruth of things, doth much diminish (in relatic the delight of thehearers: i will build boldly on my fore-alledged reason, and tel youtruly how it hapned.
niccholao cornacchini was once a citizen of ours, and a man of greatwealth; who, among other his rich possessions in camerata, buildedthere a very goodly house, which being perfected ready for painting:he compounded with bruno and buffalmaco who bicause their workerequired more helpe then their owne, they drew nello and calandrinointo their association, and began to proceed in their businesse. andbecause there was a chamber or two, having olde moveables in them,as bedding, tables, and other houshold stuffe beside, which were inthe custody of an old woman that kepte the house, without the helpe ofany other servants else, a son unto the saide niccholao, beeingnamed phillippo, resorted thither divers times, with one or otherprety damosell in his company (in regard he was unmarried) where hewould abide a day or two with her, and then convey her home againe.
at one time among the rest, it chanced that he brought a damosellthither named nicholetta, who was maintained by a wily companion,called magione, in a dwelling which hee had at camaldoli, and (indeed)no honester then she should be. she was a very beautifull young woman,wearing garments of great value, and (according to her quality) wellspoken, and of commendable carriage. comming forth of her chamberone day, covered with a white veyle, because her haire hung looseabout her, which shee went to wash at a well in the middle court,bathing there also her face and hands: calandrino going (by chance) tothe same well for water, gave her a secret salutation. she kindlyreturning the like courtesie to him, began to observe him advisedly:more, because he looked like a man newly come thither, then anyhandsomnesse she perceyved in him.
calandrino threw wanton glances at her, and seeing she was bothfaire and lovely, began to finde some occasion of tarrying, so that hereturned not with water to his other associates, yet neither knowingher, or daring to deliver one word. she, who was not to learn herlesson in alluring, noting what affectionate regards (withbashfulnesse) he gave her: answered him more boldly with the like; butmeerly in scorning manner, breathing forth divers dissembled sighsamong them: so that calandrino became foolishly inveigled with herlove, and would not depart out of the court, until phillippo, standingabove in his chamber window called her thence.
when calandrino was returned backe to his businesse, he could donothing else, but shake the head, sigh, puffe, and blowe, whichbeing observed by bruno (who alwayes fitted him according to hisfolly, as making a meer mockery of his very best behaviour) sodainlyhe said. why how now calandrino? sigh, puffe, and blow man? what maybe the reason of these unwonted qualities? calandrino immediatelyanswered, saying: my friendly companion bruno, if i had one to lend mea little helpe, i should very quickely become well enough. how? quothbruno, doth any thing offend thee, and wilt thou not reveale it to thyfriend deare bruno, said calandrino, there is a proper handsomewoman here in the house, the goodliest creature that ever any eyebeheld, much fairer then the queen of fairies her selfe, who is sodeeply falne in love with mee, as thou wouldst thinke it no lesse thena wonder; and yet i never sawe her before, till yer while when i wassent to fetch water. a very strange case, answered bruno, take heedecalandrino, that shee bee not the lovely friend to phillippo, our yongmaster, for then it may prove a dangerous matter.
calandrino stood scratching his head an indifferent while, andthen sodainly replyed thus. now trust me bruno, it is to beedoubted, because he called her at his window, and she immediatlywent up to his chamber. but what doe i care if it be so? have notthe gods themselves bene beguiled of their wenches, who were bettermen then ever phillippo can be, and shall i stand in feare of him?bruno replied: be patient calandrino, i will enquire what woman sheis, and if she be not the wife or friend to our young masterphillippo, with faire perswasions i can over-rule the matter,because shee is a familiar acquaintance of mine. but how shall weedoe, that buffalmaco may not know heereof? i can never speake toher, if hee be in my company. for buffalmaco (quoth calandrino) i haveno feare at all, but rather of nello, because he is a neer kinsmanto my wife, and he is able to undo me quite, if once it should come tohis hearing. thou saist well, replyed bruno, therefore the matter hathneede to be very cleanly carried.
now let me tell you, the woman was well enough knowne to bruno, asalso her quality of life, which phillippo had acquainted himwithall, and the reason of her resorting thither. wherefore,calandrino going forth of the roome where they wrought, onely to gaineanother sight of nicholetta, bruno revealed the whole history tobuffalmaco and nello; they all concluding together, how this amorousfit of the foole was to be followed. and when calandrino wasreturned backe againe; in whispering maner bruno said to him. hastthou once more seene her? yes, yes bruno, answered calandrino: alas,she hath slaine me with her very eye, and i am no better then a deadman. be patient said bruno, i will goe and see whether she be the samewoman which i take her for, or no: and if it prove so, then neverfeare, but refer the businesse unto me.
bruno descending downe the staires, found phillippo and nicholettain conference together, and stepping unto them, discoursed at large,what manner of man calandrino was, and how farre he was falne inlove with her: so that they made a merry conclusion, what should beperformed in this case, onely to make a pastime of his hot begun love.and being come backe againe to calandrino, he saide. it is the samewoman whereof i told thee, and therefore wee must worke wisely inthe businesse: for if phillippo perceive any thing, all the water inarno will hardly serve to quench his fury. but what wouldst thouhave me say to her on thy behalfe, if i compasse the meanes tospeake with her? first of all (quoth calandrino) and in the primeplace, tell her, that i wish infinite bushels of those blessings,which makes maides mothers, and begetteth children. next, that i amonely hers, in any service she wil command me. dooest thouunderstand me what i say? sufficiently answered bruno, leave all tome.
when supper time was come, that they gave over working, and weredescended downe into the court: there they found phillippo andnicholetta readily attending to expect some beginning of amorousbehaviour, and calandrino glanced such leering lookes at her, coughingand spetting with hummes and haes, yea in such close and secretmanner, that a starke blinde sight might verie easily have perceyvedit.
she also on the other side, returned him such queint and cunningcarriage, as enflamed him farre more furiously, even as if hee wereready to leape out of himselfe. in the meane while, phillippo,buffalmaco and the rest that were there present, seeming as if theywere seriouslie consulting together, and perceived nothing of hisfantastick behavior, according as bruno had appointed, could scarserefraine from extremity of laughter, they noted such antick trickes incalandrino.having spent an indifferent space in this foppish folly, the houre ofparting came, but not without wonderful affliction to calandrino;and as they were going towards florence, bruno saide closely tocalandrino. i dare assure thee, that thou hast made her to consume andmelt, even like ice against the warme sunne. on my word, if thouwouldst bring thy gitterne, and sit downe by us, singing some fewamorous songs of thine owne making, when we are beneath about ourbusinesse in the court: shee would presently leape out of thewindow, as being unable to tarry from thee.
i like thy counsell well bruno, answered calandrino; but shall ibring my gitterne thither indeed? yes, in any case, replied bruno, formusicke is a matter of mighty prevailing. ah bruno (quothcalandrino) thou wouldst not credit me in the morning, when i toldethee, how the very sight of my person had wounded her: i perceivedit at the very first looke of her owne, for shee had no power toconceale it. who but my selfe could so soone have enflamed heraffection, and being a woman of such worth and beauty as shee is?there are infinite proper handsome fellowes, that daily haunt thecompany of dainty damosels, yet are so shallow in the affayres oflove, as they are not able to win one wench of a thousand, no, notwith all the wit they have, such is their extreame follie and illfortune.
then pausing a while, and sodainely rapping out a lovers oath ortwo, thus he proceeded. my dearest bruno, thou shalt see how i cantickle my gitterne, and what good sport will ensue thereon. if thoudost observe me with judgement, why man, i am not so old as i seeme tobe, and she could perceive it at the very first view; yea, and sheshall finde it so too, when we have leysure to consult upon furtheroccasions: i finde my selfe in such a free and frolicke jocunditieof spirit, that i will make her to follow me, even as a fond womandoth after her child.
but beware, saide bruno, that thou do not gripe her over-hard, andin kissing, bee carefull of biting, because the teeth stand in thyhead like the pegges of a lute, yet make a comely shew in thy fairewide mouth, thy cheekes looking like two of our artificiall roses,swelling amiably, when thy jawes are well fild with meat. calandrinohearing these hansome comnendations, thought himselfe a man ofaction already, going, singing, and frisking before his companie solively, as if he had not bin in his skin.
on the morrow, carrying his gitterne thither with him, to the nolittle delight of his companions, hee both played and sung a wholebed-role of himselfe to any worke all the day: but loiteringfantastically, one while he gazed out at the window, then ran to thegate, and oftentimes downe into the court onely to have a sight of hismistresse. she also (as cunningly) encountred all his ollies, bysuch directions as bruno gave her, and many more beside of her ownedevising, to quicken him still with new occasions: bruno plaid theambassador betweene them, in delivering the messages fromcalandrino, and then returning her answers to him. sometimes whenshe was absent thence (which often hapned as occasions called her)then he would write letters in her name, and bring them, as if theywere sent by her, to give him hope of what hee desired, but becauseshe was then among her kindred, yet she could not be unmindfull ofhim.
in this manner, bruno and buffalmaco (who had the managing of thisamorous businesse) made a meere gregory of poore calandrino, causinghim somtimes to send her, one while a pretty peece of ivory, then afaire wrought purse, and a costly paire of knives, with other suchlike friendly tokens: bringing him backe againe, as in requital ofthem, counterfetted rings of no valew, bugles and bables, which heesteemed as matters of great moment. moreover, at divers close andsodain meetings, they made him pay for many dinners and suppers,amounting to indifferent charges, onely to be careful in thefurtherance of his lovesuit, and to conceale it from his wife.having worne out three or foure months space in this fond andfrivolous manner, without any other successe then as hath benedeclared; and calandrino perceiving, that the worke undertaken byhim and his fellowes, grew very neere uppon the finishing, which wouldbarre him of any longer resorting thither: hee began to solicite brunomore importunately, then all the while before he hadde done. in regardwhereof nicholetta being one day come thither, and bruno havingconferred both with her and phillippo, with ful determination what wasto be done, he began with calandrino, saying. my honest neighbourand friend, this woman hath made a thousand promises, to graunt whatthou art so desirous to have, and i plainly perceive that she hathno such meaning, but meerely plaies with both our noses. in whichrespect, seeing she is so perfidious, and will not perfourme one ofall her faithfull-made promises: if thou wilt consent to have it so,she shall be compelled to do it whether she will or no. yea marrybruno, answered calandrino, that were an excellent course indeede,if it could be done, and with expedition.
bruno stood musing awhile to himselfe, as if he had some strangestratagem in his braine, and afterward said. hast thou so muchcorage calandrino, as but to handle a peece of written parchment,which i will give thee? yes, that i have answered calandrino, i hopethat needed not to be doubted. then, saide bruno, procure that i mayhave a piece of virgin parchment brought mee, with a living bat orreremouse; three graines of incense, and an hallowed candle, thenleave me to effect what shal content thee. calandrino watched allthe next night following, with such preparation as he could make,onely to catch a bat; which being taken at the last, he broght italive to bruno (with all the other materials appointed) who taking himalone into a backer chamber, there hee wrote divers follies on theparchment, in the shape of strange and unusuall charracters, whichhe delivered to calandrino, saying: be bold calandrino, and buildconstantly uppon my wordes, that if thou canst but touch her with thissacred charractred charme, she will immediately follow thee, andfulfil whatsoever thou pleasest to command hir. wherefore, ifphillippo do this day walke any whither abroad from this house,presume to salute her, in any manner whatsoever it be, and touchingher with the written lines, go presently to the barn of hay, whichthou perceivest so neere adjoyning, the onely convenient place thatcan be, because few or none resort thither. she shall (in despightof her blood) follow thee; and when thou hast her there, i leavethee then to thy valiant victory. calandrino stood on tiptoe, like aman newly molded by fortune, and warranted bruno to fulfil alleffectually.
nello, whom calandrino most of all feared and mistrusted, had a handas deepe as any of the rest in this deceite, and was as forward alsoto have it performed, by brunoes direction, hee went unto florence,where being in company with calandrinoes wife, thus hee began.
cousine, thine unkinde usage by thine husband, is not unknown to me,how he did beate thee (beyond the compasse of all reason) when hebrought home stones from the plain of mugnone; in which regard, i amvery desirous to have thee revenged on him: which if thou wilt not do,never repute me heereafter for thy kinsman and friend. he is falnein love with a woman of the common gender, one that is to be hired formoney: he hath his private meetings with her, and the place ispartly knowne to me, as by a secret appointment (made very lately) iam credibly given to understand; wherefore walke presently alongwith me, and thou shalt take him in the heat of his knavery.
all the while as these words were uttering to her, shee could notdissemble her inward impatience, but starting up as halfe frantickewith fury. she said. o notorious villaine! darest thou abuse thinehonest wife so basely? i sweare by blessed saint bridget, thou shaltbe paid with coyne of thine owne stampe. so casting a light wearingcloake about her, and taking a yong woman in her company; shee wentaway with nello in no meane haste. bruno seeing her comming a farreoff, said to phillippo: you sir, you know what is to be done, act yourpart according to your appointment. phillippo went immediately intothe roome, where calandrino and his other consorts were at worke,and said to them. honest friends, i have certaine occasions whichcommand mine instant being at florence: worke hard while i amabsent, and i will not be unthankefull for it. away hee departedfrom them, and hid himselfe in a convenient place, where he couldnot be descryed, yet see whatsoever calandrino did: who when heimagined phillippo to be farre enough off, descended downe into thecourt, where he found nicholetta sitting alone, and going towards her,began to enter into discoursing with her.
she knowing what remained to bee done on her behalfe, drewsomewhat neere him, and shewed her selfe more familiar then formerlyshe had done: by which favourable meanes, he touched her with thecharmed parchment, which was no sooner done; but with out using anyother kinde of language, hee went to the hay-barne, whithernicholletta followed him, and both being entred, he closed the barnedoore, and then stood gazing on her, as if hee had never seene herbefore. standing stil as in a study, or bethinking himselfe what heshould say: she began to use affable gesture to him, and taking him bythe hand, made shew as if shee meant to kisse him, which yet sherefrained, though he (rather then his life) would gladly have hadit. why how now deare calandrino (quoth she) jewell of my joy, comfortof my heart, how many times have i longed for thy sweet company? andenjoying it now, according to mine owne desire, dost thou stand like astatue, or man alla morte? the rare tunes of the gitterne, but (muchmore) the melodious accents of thy voyce, excelling orpheus oramphion, so ravished my soule, as i know not how to expresse the depthof mine affection; and yet hast thou brought me hither, onely to lookebabies in mine eyes, and not so much as speake one kinde word to me?
bruno and buffalmaco, having hid themselves close behindephilippo, they both heard and saw all this amourous conflict, and ascalandrino was quickning his courage, and wiping his mouth, withintent to kisse her: his wife and nello entred into the barne, whichcaused nicholetta to get her gone presently, sheltring her selfwhere philippo lay scouting. but the enraged woman ranne furiouslyupon poore daunted calandrino, making such a pitiful massacre with hernailes, and tearing the baire from his head, as hee meerely lookedlike an infected anatomy. fowle loathsome dog (quoth she) must yoube at your minions, and leave mee hunger-starved at home? an oldeknave with (almost) never a good tooth in thy head, and yet art thouneighing after young wenches? hast thou not worke enough at home,but must bee gadding in to other mens grounds? are these the fruitesof wandring abroad?calandrino being in this pittifull perplexity, stood like one neitheralive nor dead, nor daring to use any resistance against her; but fellon his knees before his wife, holding up his hands for mercy, andentreating her (for charities sake) not to torment him any more: forhe had committed no harme at all, and the gentlewoman was hismasters wife, who came with no such intent thither, as shee fondlyimagined. wife, or wife not (quoth she) i would have none to meddlewith my i but i that have the most right to him.
bruno and buffalmaco, who had laughed all this while heartily atthis pastime, with phillippo and nicholetta; came running in hasteto know the reason of this loude noise, and after they had pacifiedthe woman with gentle perswasions: they advised calandrino, to walkewith his wife to florence, and returne no more to worke thereagaine, least phillippo hearing what had hapned, should be revenged onhim with some outrage. thus poore calandrino miserably misused andbeaten, went home to florence with his wife, scoulded and raild at allthe way, beside his other molestations (day and night) afterward:his companions, phillippo and nicholetta, making themselves merry athis mis-fortune.
the ninth day, the sixt novell
wherein is manifested, that an offence committed ignorantly,
and by mistaking; ought to be covered with good advise, and
civill discretion
two yong gentlemen, the one named panuccio, and the other adriano,lodged one night in a poore inne, where one of them went to bed to thehostes daughter, and the other (by mistaking his way in the darke)to the hostes wife. he which lay with the daughter, happened afterwardto the hostes bed and told him what he had done, as thinking hespake to his own companyon. discontentment growing betweene them,the mother perceiving her errour, went to bed to her daughter, andwith discreete language, made a generall pacification.
calandrino, whose mishaps had so many times made the wholeassembly merry, and this last passing among them with indifferentcommendations: upon a generall silence commanded, the queene gaveorder to pamphilus, that hee should follow next, as indeed he did,beginning thus. praiseworthy ladies, the name of nicoletta, sofondly affected by calandrino, putteth mee in minde of a novell,concerning another nicoletta, of whom i purpose to speake: to the endeyou may observe how by a sudden wary fore-sight, a discreet womancompassed the meanes to avoyde a notorious scandall.
on the plaine of mugnone, neere to florence, dwelt (not longsince) an honest meane man, who kept a poore inne or ostery fortravellers, where they might have some slender entertainement fortheir money. as he was but a poore man, so his house affoorded butvery small receit of guests, not lodging any but on necessity, andsuch as he had some knowledge of. this honest poore hoste had awoman (sufficiently faire) to his wife, by whom hee had also twochildren, the one a comely young maiden, aged about fifteene yeares,and the other a sonne, not fully (as yet) a yeare old, and suckingon the mothers brest.
a comely youthfull gentleman of our city, became amorouslyaffected to the damosell, resorting thither divers times as heetravelled on the way, to expresse how much he did respect her. and sheaccounting her fortune none of the meanest, to bee beloved by soyouthfull a gallant, declared such vertuous and modest demeanour, asmight deserve his best opinion of her: so that their love grew to anequall simpathy, and mutuall contentment of them both, inexpectation of further effects; he being named panuccio, and shenicholletta.
the heate of affection thus encreasing day by day, panuccio grewexceedingly desirous to enjoy the fruits of hi; long continued liking,and divers devises mustred in his braine, how he might compasse onenights lodging in her fathers house, whereof hee knew every part andparcell, as not doubting to effect what hee desired, yetundiscovered by any, but the maide her selfe.
according as his intention aymed, so he longed to put it inexecution, and having imparted his mind to an honest loyall friend,named adriano, who was acquainted with the course of his love:hyring two horses, and having portmantues behind them, filled withmatters of no moment, they departed from florence, as if they had somegreat journey to ride. having spent the day time where themselves bestpleased, darke night being entred, they arrived on the plaine ofmugnone, where, as if they were come from the parts of romanio, theyrode directly to this poore inne, and knocking at the doore, thehonest hoste (being familiar and friendly to all commers) opened thedoore, when panuccio spake in this manner to him. good man, we mustrequest one nights lodging with you, for we thought to have reached sofarre as florence, but dark night preventing us, you see at what alate houre wee are come hither. signior panuccio, answered thehoste, it is not unknowne to you, how unfiting my poore house is,for entertaining such guests as you are: neverthelesse, seeing you areovertaken by so unseasonable an houre, and no other place is neere foryour receite; i will gladly lodge you so well as i can.
when they were dismounted from their horses, and entred into thesimple inne: having taken order for feeding their horses, theyaccepted such provision, as the place and time afforded, requestingthe hoste to suppe with them. now i am to tell you, that there was butone small chamsber in the house, wherin stood three beds, as bestthe hoste had devised to place them, two of them standing by thewalles side, and the third fronting them both, but with such close andnarrow passage, as very hardly could one step betweene them. thebest of these three beds was appointed for the gentlemen, andtherein they layd them down to rest, but sleepe they could not, albeitthey dissembled it very formally. in the second bed was nicholetta thedaughter, lodged by her selfe, and the father and mother in the third,and because she was to give the child sucke in the night time, theradle (wherein it lay) stood close by their beds side, because thechildes crying or any other occasion concerning it, should notdisquiet the gentlemen.
panuccio having subtily observed all this, and in what manner theywent to bed; after such a space of time, as he imagined them to be allfast asleepe, he arose very softly, and stealing to the bed ofnicholetta, lay downe gently by her. and albeit she seemed somewhatafraid at the first, yet wheri she perceived who it was, shee ratherbad him welcome, then shewed her selfe any way discontented. now whilepanuccio continued thus with the maide, it fortuned that a cat threwdown somewhat in the house, the noise wherof awaked the wife, andfearing greater harme, then (indeed) had hapned, she arose without acandle, and went groping in the darke, towards the place where sheeheard the noyse. adriano, who had no other meaning but well, foundoccasion also to rise, about some naturall necessity, and making hispassage in the darke, stumbled on the childes cradle (in the way)where the woman had set it, and being unable to passe by, withoutremoving it from the place: tooke and set it by his owne beds side,and having done the businesse for which he rose, returned to his bedagaine, never remembring to set the cradle where first he found it.
the wife having found the thing throwne downe being of no value ormoment, cared not for lighting any candle; but rating the cat,returned backe, feeling for the bed where her husband lay, but findingnot the cradle there, she said to her selfe. what a foolish woman ami, that cannot well tell my selfe what i doe? instead of my husbandsbed, i am going to both my guests.
so, stepping on a little further, she found the childes cradle,and laid her selfe downe by adriano, thinking shee had gone right toher husband. adriano being not yet falne asleepe, feeling the hostessein bed with him: tooke advantage of so faire an occasion offered,and what he did, is no businesse of mine, (as i heard) neither foundthe woman any fault. matters comming to passe in this strangemanner, and panuccio fearing, lest sleepe seazing on him, he mightdisgrace the maides reputation: taking his kinde farewell of her, withmany kisses and sweet imbraces: returned againe to his owne bed, butmeeting with the cradle in his way, and thinking it stood by thehostes bed, (as truely it did so at the first) went backe from thecradle, and stept into the hostes bed indeed, who awaked upon his veryentrance, albeit he slept very soundly before.
panuccio supposing that he was laid downe by his loving friendadriano, merrily said to the hoste. i protest to thee, as i am agentleman, nicholetta is a dainty delicate wench, and worthy to be avery good mans wife: this night shee hath given mee the sweetestentertainement, as the best prince in the world can wish no better,and i have kist her most kindly for it. the hoste hearing these newes,which seemed very unwelcome to him, said first to himself: what makesuch a devill heere in my bedde? afterward being more rashly angry,then well advised, hee said to panuccio. canst thou make vaunt of sucha mounstrous villany? or thinkest thou, that heaven hath not duevengeance in store, to requite all wicked deeds of darkenesse? ifall should sleepe, yet i have courage sufficient to right my wrong,and yet as olde as i am to rig thou shalt be sure to finde it.
our amorous panuccio being none of the wisest young men in theworld, perceiving his errour; sought not to amend it, (as well hemight have done) with some queint straine of wit, carried in quick andcleanly manner, but angerly answered. what shall i find that thoudarst doe to me? am i any way afraid of thy threatnings? the hostesimagining she was in bed with her husband, said to adriano: harkehusband, i thinke our guests are quarrelling together, i hope theywill doe no harme to one another. adriano laughing outright, answered.let them alone, and become friends againe as they fell out: perhapsthey dranke too much yesternight.
the woman perceiving that it was her husband that quarrelled, anddistinguishing the voyce of adriano from his: knew presently whereshee was, and with whom; wherefore having wit at will, and desirous tocloude an error unadvisedly committed, and with no willing consentof her selfe: without returning any more words, presently she rose,and taking the cradle with the child in it, removed it the to herdaughters bed side, although shee had no light to helpe her, andafterward went to bed to her, where (as if she were but newlyawaked) she called her husband, to understand what angry speecheshad past betweene him and panuccio. the hoste replyed, saying. didstthou not heare him wife, brag and boast, how he hath lyen this nightwith our daughter nicholetta? husband (quoth she) he is no honestgentleman; if hee should say so, and beleeve me it is a manifestlye, for i am in bed with her my selfe, and never yet closed mine eyestogether, since the first houre i laid me downe: it is unmannerly doneof him to speake it, and you are little lesse then a logger-head, ifyou doe beleeve it. this proceedeth from your bibbing and swillingyesternight, which (as it seemeth) maketh you to walke about the roomein your sleepe, dreaming of wonders in the night season: it were nogreat sinne if you brake your neck, to teach you keepe a fairerquarter; and how commeth it to passe, that signior panuccio couldnot keepe himselfe in his owne bed?
adriano (on the other side) perceiving how wisely the womanexcused her owne shame and her daughters; to backe her in abusinesse so cunningly begun, he called to panuccio, saying. havenot i tolde thee an hundred times, that thou art not fit to lye anywhere, out of thine owne lodging? what a shame is this baseimperfection to thee, by rising and walking thus in the night-time,according as thy dreames doe wantonly delude thee, and cause thee toforsake thy bed, telling nothing but lies and fables, yet avouchingthem for manifest truthes? assuredly this will procure no meane perillunto thee: come hither, and keepe in thine owne bedde for meere shame.
when the honest meaning host heard, what his own wife and adrianohad confirmed: he was verily perswaded, that panuccio spake in adreame all this while: and to make it the more constantly apparant,panuccio (being now growne wiser by others example) lay talking andblundring to himselfe, even as if dreames or perturbations of theminde did much molest him, with strange distractions in frantickemanner. which the hoste perceiving, and compassionating his case, asone man should do anothers: he tooke him by the shoulders, jogging andhunching him, saying. awake signior panuccio, and get you gone henceto your owne bed.
panuccio, yawning and stretching out his limbes, with unusuallgroanes and respirations, such as (better) could bee hardlydissembled: seemed to wake as out of a traunce, and calling his friendadriano, said.
adriano, is it day, that thou dost waken me? it may be day ornight replyed adriano, for both (in these fits) are alike to thee.arise man for shame, and come to thine lodging. then faining to bemuch troubled and sleepie, he arose from the hoast, and went toadrianoes bed.
when it was day, and all in the house risen, the hoast began tosmile at panuccio, mocking him with his idle dreaming and talking inthe night.
so, falling from one merry matter to another, yet without anymislike at all: the gentlemen, having their horses prepared, and theirportmantues fastened behind, drinking to their hoast, mounted onhorsebacke, and they roade away towards florence, no lesse contentedwith the manner of occasions happened, then the effects they sortedto. afterward, other courses were taken, for the continuance of thisbegun pleasure with nicholetta, who made her mother beleeve, thatpanuccio did nothing else but dreame. and the mother her selferemembring how kindely adriano had used her (a fortune not expected byher before:) was more then halfe of the minde, that she did thendreame also, while she was waking.
the ninth day, the seventh novell
whereby (with some indifferent reason) it is concluded, that
dreames do not alwayes fall out to be leasings
talano de molese dreamed, that a wolfe rent and tore his wivesface and throate. which dreame he told to her, with advise to keepeher selfe out of danger; which she refusing to doe, received whatfollowed.
by the conclusion of pamphilus his novel, wherein the womans readywit, at a time of such necessity, carried deserved commendations:the queen gave command to madam pampinea, that she should next beginwith hers, and so she did, in this manner. in some discourses(gracious ladies) already past among us, the truth of apparitions indreames hath partly bin approved, whereof very many have made amockery. neverthelesse, whatsoever hath heeretofore bin sayde, ipurpose to acquaint you with a very short novell, of a strangeaccident happening unto a neighbour of mine, in not crediting a dreamewhich her husband told her.
i cannot tell, whether you knew talano de molese, or no, a man ofmuch honour, who tooke to wife a yong gentlewoman, named margarita, asbeautifull as the best: but yet so peevish, scornefull, andfantasticall, that she disdained any good advice given her; neythercould any thing be done, to cause her contentment; which absurd humorswere highly displeasing to her husband: but in regard he knew nothow to helpe it, constrainedly he did endure it. it came to passe,that talano being with his wife, at a summer-house of his owne inthe country, he dreamed one night, that he saw his wife walking in afaire wood, which adjoyned neere unto his house, and while she thuscontinued there, he seemed to see issue foorth from a corner of thesaid wood, a great and furious wolfe, which on her, caught her bythe face and throate, drawing her downe to the earth, and offeringto drag her thence. but he crying out for helpe, recovered her fromthe wolfe, yet having her face and throat very pitifully rent andtorne.
in regard of this terrifying dreame, when talano was risen in themorning, and sate conversing with his wife, he spake thus unto hir.woman, although thy froward wilfull nature be such, as hath notpermitted me one pleasing day with thee, since first we becam manand wife, but rather my life hath bene most tedious to me, asfearing still some mischeefe should happen to thee: yet let mee now inloving manner advise thee, to follow my counsell, and (this day) notto walke abroad out of this house. she demanded a reason for thisadvice of his. he related to her every particular of his dreame,adding with all these speeches.
true it is wife (quoth he) that little credit should bee given todreames: neverthelesse, when they deliver advertisement of harmes toensue, there is nothing lost by shunning and avoiding them. shefleering in his face, and shaking her head at him, replyed. suchharmes as thou wishest, such thou dreamest of. thou pretendest muchpittie and care of me, but all to no other end: but what mischeefesthou dreamest happening unto mee, so wouldest thou see them effectedon me. wherefore, i will well enough looke to my selfe, both this day,and at all times else: because thou shalt never make thy selfemerry, with any such misfortune as thou wishest unto me.
well wife, answered talano, i knew well enough before, what thouwouldst say: an unsound head is soone scratcht with the verygentlest combe: but beleeve as thou pleasest. as for my selfe, ispeake with a true and honest meaning soule, and once againe i doadvise thee, to keepe within our doores all this day: at least wisebeware, that thou walke not into our wood, bee it but in regard ofmy dreame. well sir (quoth she scoffingly) once you shall say, ifollowed your counsell: but within her selfe she fell to thismurmuring. now i perceive my husbands cunning colouring, and why imust not walke this day into our wood: he hath made a compact withsome common queane, closely to have her company there, and isafraide least i should take them tardy. belike he would have me feedamong blinde folke, and i were worthy to bee thought a starke foole,if i should not prevent a manifest trechery, being intended againstme. go thither therefore i will, and tarry there all the whole daylong; but i will meet with him in his merchandize, and see the pinkwherin he adventures.
after this her secret consultation, her husband was no sooner goneforth at one doore, but shee did the like at another, yet sosecretly as possibly she could devise to doe, and (without anydelaying) she went to the wood, wherein she hid her selfe veryclosely, among the thickest of the bushes, yet could discerne everyway about her, if any body should offer to passe by her. while sheekept her selfe in this concealment, suspecting other mysteriousmatters, as her idle imagination had tutord her, rather then thedanger of any wolfe: out of a brakie thicket by her, sodainly rushed ahuge and dreadfull wolfe, as having found her by the sent, mountinguppe, and grasping her throat in his mouth, before she saw him, orcould call to heaven for mercy.
being thus seised of her, he carried her as lightly away, as if sheehad bin no heavier then a lambe, she being (by no meanes) able to cry,because he held her so fast by the throate, and hindred any helping ofher selfe. as the wolfe carried her thus from thence, he had quitestrangled her, if certaine shepheards had not met him, who withtheir outcries and exclaimes at the wolfe, caused him to let her fall,and hast away to save his owne life. notwithstanding the harme done toher throat and face, the shepheards knew her, and caried her home toher house, where she remained a long while after, carefully attendedby physitians and chirurgians.
now, although they were very expert and cunning men all, yet couldthey not so perfectly cure her, but both her throate, and part ofher face were so blemished that whereas she seemed a rare creaturebefore, she was now deformed and much unsightly. in regard of whichstrange alteration, being ashamed to shew her selfe in any place,where formerly she had bene seene she spent her time in sorrow andmourning, repenting her insolent and scornfull carriage, as also herrash running forth into danger, upon a foolish and jealous surmise,beleeving her husbands dreames the better for ever after.
the ninth day, the eight novell
whereby plainly appeareth, that they which take delight in
deceiving others, do well deserve to be deceived themselves
blondello (in a merry maner) caused guiotto to beguile himselfe of agood dinner: for which deceit, guiotto became cunningly revenged, byprocurng blondello to be unreasonably beaten and misused.
it was a generall opinion in the whole joviall companie, thatwhatsoever talano saw in his sleepe, was not anie dreame, but rather avision: considring, every part thereof fell out so directly, withoutthe lest failing. but when silence was enjoyned, then the queenegave forth by evident demonstration, that madam lauretta was next tosucceed, whereupon she thus began. as all they (judicious hearers)which have this day spoken before me, derived the ground or project oftheir novels, from some other argument spoken of before: even so,the cruell revendge of the scholler, yesterday discoursed at largeby madame pampinea, maketh me to remember another tale of like nature,some-what greevous to the sufferer, yet not in such cruell measureinflicted, as that on madam helena.
there dwelt sometime in florence, one who was generally called bythe name of guiotto, a man being the greatest gourmand, and grossestfeeder, as ever was seene in any countrey, all his meanes andprocurements meerly unable to maintaine expences for filling hisbelly. but otherwise he was of sufficient and commendable carriage,fairely demeaned, and well- discoursing on any argument: yet, not as acurious and spruce courtier, but rather a frequenter of rich menstables, where choice of good cheere is sildome wanting, and suchshould have his company, albeit not invited, yet (like a boldintruder) he had the courage to bid himselfe welcome.
at the same time, and in our city of florence also, there wasanother man, named blondello, very low of stature, yet comly formed,quicke witted, more neat and brisk then a butterflye, alwaieswearing a wrought silke cap on his head, and not a haire staring outof order, but the tuft flourishing above the forehead, and he suchanother trencher-fly for the table, as our forenamed guiotto was. itso fel out on a morning in the lent time, that hee went into thefishmarket, where he bought two goodly lampreyes, for messer vierode cherchi, and was espied by guiotto, who to blondello) said. what isthe meaning of this cost, and for whom is it? whereto blondello thusanswered. yesternight, three other lampries, far fairer and fatterthen these, and a whole sturgeon, were sent unto messer corsodonati, and being not sufficient to feede divers gentlemen, whom heehath invited this day to dine with him, hee caused me to buy these twobeside: doest not thou intend to make one among them? yes i warrantthee, replied guiotto, thou knowst i can invite my selfe thither,without any other bidding.
so parting; about the houre of dinner time, guiotto went to thehouse of the saide messer corso, whom he found sitting and talkingwith certain of his neighbors, but dinner was not (as yet) ready,neither were they come thither to dinner. messer corso demaunded ofguiotto, what newes with him, and whither he went? why sir (saidguiotto) i come to dine with you, and your good company. wherto messercorso answered, that he was welcom, and his other friends beinggone, dinner was served in, none els therat present but messer corsoand guiotto: al the diet being a poore dish of pease, a litle piece oftunny, and a few smal fishes fried, without any other dishes to followafter. guiotto seeing no better fare, but being disapointed of hisexpectation, as longing to feed on the lampries and sturgeon, and soto have made a ful dinner indeed: was of a quick apprehension, andapparantly perceived, that blondello had meerly guld him in a knavery,which did not a litle vex him, and made him vow to be revenged onblondello, as he could compasse occasion afterward.
before many dales were past, it was his fortune to meete withblondello, who having told this jest to divers of his friends, andmuch good merriment made thereat: he saluted guiotto in ceremoniousmanner, saying. how didst thou like the fat lampreyes and sturgeon,which thou fedst on at the house of messer corso donati? wel sir(answered guiotto) perhaps before eight dayes passe over my head, thoushalt meet with as pleasing a dinner as i did. so, parting away fromblondello, he met with a porter or burthen-bearer, such as are usuallysent on errands; and hyring him to deliver a message for him, gave hima glasse bottle, and bringing him neere to the hal-house ofcavicciuli, shewed him there a knight, called signior phillipoargenti, a man of huge stature, stout, strong, vain-glorious, fierceand sooner mooved to anger then any other man. to him (quothguiotto) thou must go with this bottle in thy hand, and say thus tohim. sir, blondello sent me to you, and courteously entreateth you,that you would enrubinate this glasse bottle with your best claretwine; because he would make merry with a few friends of his. butbeware he lay no hand on thee, because he may bee easi induced tomisuse thee, and so my businesse be disappointed. well sir replied theporter, shal i say any thing else unto him? no (quoth guiotto) only goand deliver this message, and when thou art returned, ile pay thee forthy paines.
the porter being gone to the house, delivered his message to theknight, who being a man of no great civill breeding, but furious,rash, and inconsiderate: presently conceived, that blondello (whomhe knew well enough) sent this message in meere mockage of him, andstarting up with fiery lookes, said: what enrubination of claretshould i send him? and what have i to do with him, or his drunkenfriends? let him and thee go hang your selves together. so he stept tocatch hold on the porter, but he (being well warnd before) wasquicke and nimble, and escaping from him, returned backe to guiotto(who observed all) and told him the answer of signior phillippo.guiotto not a little contented, paied the porter, and taried not inany place til he met with blondello, to whom he said. when wast thouat the hall of cavicciuli? not a long while, answerd blondello, butwhy dost thou demand such a question? because (quoth guiotto)signior phillippo hath sought about for thee, yet knowe not i whathe would have with thee. is it so? replied blondello, then i wil walkethither presently, to understand his pleasure.
when blondello was thus parted from him, guiotto folowed not farreoff behind him, to behold the issue of this angry businesse; andsignior phillippo, because he could not catch the porter, continuedmuch distempred, fretting and fuming, in regard he could notcomprehend the meaning of the porters message: but onely surmized,that blondello (by the procurement of some body else) had done this inscorne of him.
while he remained thus deeply discontented, he espied blondellocomming towards him, and meeting him by the way, he stept close tohim, and gave him a cruell blow on the face, causing his nose tofall out a bleeding. alas sir, said blondello, wherefore do you strikeme? signior phillippo, catching him by the haire of the head, trampledhis wrought night-cap in the dirt, and his cloke also; when, layingmany violent blowes on him, he said. villanous traitor as thou art,ile teach thee what it is to enrubinate with claret, either thy selfe,or any of thy cupping companions: . ons: am i a child, to be jestedwithall?
nor was he more furious in words, then in strokes also, beatinghim about the face, hardly leaving any haire on his head, and dragginghim along in the mire, spoyling all his garments, and he not able(from the first blow given) to speake a word in defence of himselfe.in the end, signior phillippo having extreamly beaten him, and manypeople gathering about them, to succour a man so much misused, thematter was at large related, and manner of the message sending. forwhich, they all present, did greatly reprehend blondello,considering he knew what kinde of man philippo was, not any way tobe jested with blondello in teares constantly maintained, that henever sent any such message for wine, or intended it in the leastdegree: so, when the tempest was more mildly calmed, and blondello(thus cruelly beaten and durtied) had gotten home to his owne house,he could then remember, that (questionles) this was occasioned byguiotto.
after some few dayes were passed over, and the hurts in his faceindifferently cured; blondello beginning to walke abroade againe,chanced to meet with guiotto: who laughing heartily at him, sayde.tell me blondello, how doost thou like the enrubinating clarret ofsignior phillippo? as well (quoth blondello) as thou didst thesturgeon and lampreyes at messer corso donaties. why then (saydeguiotto) let these two tokens continue familiar betweene thee andme, when thou wouldst bestow such another dinner on mee, then wil ienrubinate thy nose with a bottle of the same claret. but blondelloperceived (to his cost) that hee had met with the worser bargaine, andguiotto got cheare, without any blowes: and therefore desired apeacefull attonement, each of them (alwayes after) abstaining fromflouting one another.
the ninth day, the ninth novell
containing an excellent admonition, that such as covet to have
the love of other men, must first learne themselves, how to love:
also, by what meanes such women as are curst and self-willed, may
be reduced to civill obedience
two yong gentlemen, the one named melisso, borne in the city oflaiazzo: and the other giose of antioche, travalled together untosalomon, the famous king of great britaine. the one desiring to learnewhat he should do, whereby to compasse and winne the love of men.the other craved to be enstructed by what meanes hee might reclaime anheadstrong and unruly wife. and what answeres the wise king gaveunto them both, before they departed away from him.
upon the conclusion of madame urettaes novell, none now ained tosucceede next in er, but onely the queene r viledge reserved,granted to dioneus; wherefore, after they had all smiled at thefolly of blondello, with a chearfull countenance thus the queenebegan.
honourable ladies, if with advised judgement, we do duly considerthe order of all things, we shall very easily perceyve, that the wholeuniversall multiplicitie of women, by nature, custome, and lawes,are and ought to be subject to men, yea, and to be governd by theirdiscretion. because every one desiring to enjoy peace, repose andcomfort with them, under whose charge they are; ought to be humble,patient and obedient, over and beside her spotlesse honesty, whichis the crowne and honour of every good woman. and although thoselawes, which respect the common good of all things, or rather useand custome (as our wonted saying is) the powers wherof are verygreat, and worthy to be reverenced, should not make us wise in thiscase. yet nature hath given us a sufficient demonstration, in creatingour bodies more soft and delicate, yea, and our hearts timorous,fearefull, benigne and compassionable, our strength feeble, our voycespleasing, and the motion of our members sweetly plyant: all whichare apparant testimonies, that wee have neede of others government.
now, it is not to be denyed, that whosoever hath need of helpe,and is to bee governed: meerely reason commandeth, that they shouldbee subject and obedient to their governour. who then should we havefor our helps and governours, if not men? wherfore, we should beintirely subject to them, in giving them due honour and reverence, andsuch a one as shall depart from this rule: she (in mine opinion) isnot onely worthy of grievous reprehension, but also severechastisement beside. and to this exact consideration (over and abovedivers other important reasons) i am the rather induced, by thenovel which madame pampinea so lately reported, concerning the frowardand wilfull wife of talano, who had a heavier punishment inflictedon her, then her husband could devise to doe. and therefore it is myperemptory sentence, that all such women as will not be gracious,benigne and pleasing: doe justly deserve (as i have already said)rude, rough and harsh handling, as both nature, custome and lawes havecommanded.
to make good what i have said, i wil declare unto you the counselland advise, given by salomon, the wise and famous king of greatbritaine, as a most wholesome and soveraigne medicine for the cureof such a dangerous disease, in any woman so fouly infected. whichcounsel (notwithstanding) all such women as have no need of thisphisicke, i would not have them to imagine, that it was meant forthem, albeit men have a common proverbe, to wit.
as the good horse and bad horse, doe both need the spurre.
so a good wife and bad wife, a wand will make stirre.
which saying, whosoever doth interpret it in such pleasing manner asthey ought, shal find it (as you al wil affirm no lesse) to be verytrue: especially in the morall meaning, it is beyond allcontradiction. women are naturally all unstable, and easilyenclining to misgovernment; wherefore to correct the iniquity ofsuch a distemperature in them that out-step the tearmes and boundsof womanhood, a wand hath been allowed for especiall phisicke. as inthe like manner, for support of vertue, in those of contrarycondition, shaming to be sullyed with so grosse a sinne: thecorrecting wand may serve as a walking staffe, to protect them fromall other feares. but, forbearing to teach any longer; let mee proceedto my purpose, and tell you my novell.
in those ancient and reverend dayes, wherof i am now to speake,the high renowne and admirable wisedome of salomon, king of greatbrittain, was most famous throughout all parts of the world; foranswering all doubtfull questions and demaunds whatsoever, thatpossibly could be propounded to him. so that many resorted to him,from the most remote and furthest off countreyes, to heare hismiraculous knowledge and experience, yea, and to crave his counsell,in matters of greatest importance. among the rest of them whichrepaired thither, was a rich yong gentleman, honourably descended,named melisso, who came from the city of laiazzo, where he was bothborne, and dwelt.
in his riding towards france, as he passed by naples, heeovertooke another yong gentleman, a native of antioch, and namedgiosefo, whose journey lay the same way as the others did. havingridden in company some few dayes together, as it is a custome commonlyobserved among travellers, to understand one anothers countrey andcondition, as also to what part his occasions call him: so happened itwith them, giosefo directly telling him, that he journyed, towards thewise king salomon, to desire his advise what meanes he shouldobserve in the reclaiming of a wilfull wife, the most froward andselfe-willed woman that ever lived; whom neither faire perswasions,nor gentle courtesies could in any manner prevaile withall.afterward he demaunded of melisso, to know the occasion of histravell, and whither.
now trust me sir, answered melisso, i am a native of laiazzo, and asyou are vexed with one great mis-fortune, even so am i offended withanother. i am young, wealthy, well derived by birth, and allowliberall expences, for maintaining a worthy table in my house, withoutdistinguishing persons by their rancke and quality, but make it freefor all commers, both of the city, and all places els. notwithstandingall which bounty and honourable entertainement, i cannot meet with anyman that loveth me. in which respect, i journey to the same place asyou doe, to crave the counsell of so wise a king, what i should doe,whereby i might procure men to love me. thus like two well-metfriendly companions, they rode on together, untill they arrived ingreat britaine, where, by meanes of the noble barons attending onthe king, they were brought before him. melisso delivered his minde invery few words, whereto the king made no other answere, but this:learne to love. which was no sooner spoken, but melisso wasdismissed from the kings presence.
giosefo also relating, wherefore he came thither; the kingreplying onely thus: goe to the goose bridge: and presently giosefohad also his dismission from the king. comming forth, he found melissoattending for him, and revealed in what manner the king had answeredhim: whereupon, they consulted together, concerning both theiransweres, which seemed either to exceed their comprehension, or elsewas delivered them in meere mockery, and therefore (more then halfediscontented) they returned homeward againe.
after they had ridden on a few dayes together, they came to a river,over which was a goodly bridge, and because a great company ofhorses and mules (heavily laden, and after the manner of a caravanof camels in egypt) were first to passe over the saide bridge; theygladly stayed to permit their passe. the greater number of thembeing already past over, there was one shie and skittish mule(belike subject to fearefull starting, as oftentimes we see horseshave the like ill quality) that would not passe over the bridge by anymeanes, wherefore one of the muletters tooke a good cudgell, and smoteher at the first gently, as hoping so to procure her passage.notwithstanding, starting one while backeward, then againe forward,side-wayes, and every way indeed, but the direct roadway she would notgoe.
now grew the muletter extreamely angry, giving her many cruellstroakes, on the head, sides, flancks and all parts else, but yet theyproved to no purpose, which melisso and giosefo seeing, and being(by this meanes) hindred of their passage, they called to themuletter, saying. foolish fellow, what doest thou? intendest thou tokill the mule? why dost thou not leade her gently, which is thelikelier course to prevaile by, then beating and misusing her asthou dost? content your selves gentlemen (answered the muletter) youknow your horses qualities, as i doe my mules, let mee deale withher as i please. having thus spoken, he gave her so many violentstrokes, on head, sides, hippes, and every where else, as made herat last passe over the bridge quietly, so that the muletter wonnethe mastery of his mule.
when melisso and giosefo had passed over the bridge, where theyintended to part each from other; a sudden motion happened into theminde of melisso, which caused him to demaund of an aged man (who satecraving almes of passengers at the bridge foot) how the bridge wascalled: sir, answered the old man, this is called, the goose bridge.which words when giosefo heard, hee called to minde the saying of kingsalomon, and therefore immediately saide to melisso. worthy friend,and partner in my travell, i dare now assure sure that the counsellgiven me by king salomon, may fall out most effectall and true: fori plainely perceive, that i knew not how to handle my selfe-will'dwife, untill the muletter did instruct me. so, requesting still toenjoy the others company, they journeyed on, till at the length theycame to laiazzo, where giosefo retained melisso still with him, forsome repose after so long a journey, and entertained him with veryhonourable respect and courtesie.
one day giosefo said to his wife: woman, this gentleman is myintimate friend, and hath borne me company in all my travell: suchdyet therfore as thou wilt welcome him withall, i would have itordered (in dressing) according to his direction. melisso perceivingthat giosefo would needs have it to be so; in few words directed hersuch a course, as (for ever) might be to her husbands contentment. butshe, not altring a jote from her former disposition, but ratherfarre more froward and tempestuous: delighted to vexe and crossehim, doing every thing quite contrary to the order appointed. whichgiosefo observing, angerly he said unto her. was it not tolde you bymy friend, in what manner he would have our supper drest? sheturning fiercely to him, replyed. am i to be directed by him orthee? supper must and shall bee drest as i will have it: if itpleaseth mee, i care not who doth dislike it; if thou wouldst haveit otherwise, goe seeke both your suppers where you may have it.
melisso marvelling at her froward answere, rebuked her for it invery kind manner: whereupon, giosefo spake thus to her. i perceivewife, you are the same woman as you were wount to be: but beleeve meon my word, i shal quite alter you from this curst complexion. soturning to melisso, thus he proceeded. noble friend, we shall tryanone, whether the counsell of king salomon bee effectuall, or no; andi pray you, let it not be offensive to you to see it; but ratherhold all to be done in merriment. and because i would not behindered by you, doe but remember the answere which the mulettergave us, when we tooke compassion on his mule. worthy friend,replyed melisso, i am in your owne house, where i purpose not toimpeach whatsoever you doe.
giosefo, having provided a good hollywand, went into the chamber,where his wife sate railing, and despitefully grumbling, wheretaking her by the haire of her head, he threw her at his feete,beating her extreamely with the wand. she crying, then cursing, nextrailing, lastly fighting, biting and scratching, when she felt thecruell smart of the blowes, and that all her resistance served to noend: then she fell on her knees before him, and desired mercy forcharities sake. giosefo fought still more and more on head, armes,shoulders, sides, and all parts else, pretending as if he heard nother complaints, but wearied himselfe wel neere out of breath: sothat (to be briefe) she that never felt his fingers before,perceived and confessed, it was now too soone. this being done, heereturned to melisso, and said: tomorrow we shall see a miracle, andhow availeable the counsell is of going to the goose bridge. sositting a while together, after they had washed their hands, and supt,they withdrew to their lodgings.
the poore beaten woman, could hardly raise her selfe from theground, which yet (with much adoe) she did, and threw her selfe uponthe bed, where she tooke such rest as she could: but arising early thenext morning, she came to her husband, and making him a very lowcourtesie, demaunded what hee pleased to have for his dinner; hesmiling heartely thereat, with melisso, tolde her his mind. and whendinner time came, every thing was ready according to the directiongiven: in which regard, they highly commended the counsell, whereofthey made such an harsh construction at the first.
within a while after, melisso being gone from giosefo, andreturned home to his owne house: hee acquainted a wise and reverendman, with the answere which king salomon gave him, whereto heereceived this reply. no better or truer advise could possibly be givenyou, for well you know, that you love not any man; but the bountifulbanquets you bestow on them, is more in respect of your ownevaine-glory, then any kind affection you beare to them: learne then tolove men, as salomon advised, and you shall be beloved of them againe.thus our unruly wife became mildely reclaimed, and the yong gentleman,by loving others, found the fruits of reciporall affection.
the ninth day, the tenth novell
in just reproofe of such foolish men, as will be governed by
over-light beleefe
john de barolo, at the instance and request of his gossip pietroda tresanti, made an enchantment, to have his wife become a mule.and when it came to the fastening on of the taile; gossip pietro bysaying she should have no taile at all, spoyled the whole enchantment.
this novell reported by the queene, caused a little murmuringamong the ladies, albeit the men laughed heartely thereat: but afterthey were all growne silent, dioneus began in this manner. graciousbeauties, among many white doves, one blacke crow will seeme moresightly, then the very whitest swanne can doe. in like manner, among amultitude of wise men, sometimes one of much lesse wisedome anddiscretion, shall not onely increase the splendour and majestie oftheir maturity, but also give an addition of delight and solace.
in which regard, you all being modest and discreet ladies, and myselfe more, much defective in braine, then otherwise able: in makingyour vertues shine gloriously, through the evident apparance of mineowne weakenesse, you should esteeme the better of mee, by how much iseeme the more cloudy and obscure. and consequently, i ought to havethe larger scope of liberty, by plainely expressing what i am, andbe the more patiently endured by you all, in saying what absurdly ishall; then i should be if my speeches savoured of absolute wisdome. iwill therfore tell you a tale, which shall not be of any great length,whereby you may comprehend, how carefully such things should beobserved, which are commanded by them, as can effect matters by thepower of enchantment, and how little delayance also ought to be insuch, as would not have an enchantment to be hindered.
about a yeare already past since, there dwelt at barletta, an honestman, called john de barolo, who because he was of poore condition; formaintenance in his contented estate, provided himselfe of a mule, tocarry commodities from place to place, where faires and markets werein request, but most especially to apuglia, buying and selling inthe nature of a petty chapman. travelling thus thorow thecountreyes, he grew into great and familiar acquaintance, with one whonamed himselfe pietro da tresanti, following the same trade of life ashe did, carrying his commodities upon an asse. in signe of amitie,according to the countreyes custome, he never tearmed him otherwisethen by the name of gossip pietro and alwayes when he came tobarletta, he brought him to his own house, taking it as his inne,entreating him very friendly, and in the best manner he could deviseto doe. on the other side, gossip pietro being very poore, havingbut one simple habitation in the village of tresanti, hardly sufecientfor him, and an handsome young woman which he had to his wife, as alsohis asse: evermore when john de barolo came to tresanti, he wouldbring him to his poore abiding, with all his uttermost abilitie ofentertainement, in due acknowledgement of the courtesie he afforded tohim at barletta. but when he came to take repose in the nightseason, gossip pietro could not lodge him as gladly he would:because he had but one silly bed, wherein himselfe and his wife lay;so that john de barolo was faigne to lie on a little straw, in a smallstable, close adjoyning by his owne mule and the asse.
the woman understanding, what good and honest welcome, gossip johnafforded her husband, when he came to barletta, was often very willingto goe lodge with an honest neighbour of hers, called carapresa digludice leo, because the two gossips might both lie together in onebed; wherewith divers times she acquainted her husband, but by nomeanes he would admit it.
at one time among the rest, as she was making the same motion againeto her husband, that his friend might be lodged in better manner:gossip john thus spake to her. good zita carapresa, never molestyour selfe for me, because i lodge to mine owne contentment, and somuch the rather, in regard that whensoever i list: i can convert mymule into a faire young woman, to give mee much delight in thenight-season, and afterward make her a mule againe: thus am i neverwithout her company.
the young woman wondring at these words, and beleeving he did notfable in them: she told them to her husband, with this additionbeside, pietro (quoth she) if he be such a deare friend to thee, asthou hast often avouched to me; wish him to instruct thee in so rare acunning, that thou maist make a mule of me; then shalt thou haveboth an asse and a mule to travell withall about thy businesse,whereby thy benefit will be double: and when we returne home to ourhouse, then thou maist make mee thy wife againe, in the same conditionas i was before. gossip pietro, who was (indeed) but a very coxecombe;beleeved also the words to be true, yeelding therefore the more gladlyto her advise; and moving the matter to his gossip john, to teachhim such a wonderfull secret, which would redound so greatly to hisbenefit: but john began to disswade him from it, as having spoken itin merriment, yet perceiving, that no contradiction would serve tofrevaile, thus he began.
seeing you will needs have it so, let us rise to morrow morningbefore day, as in our travell we use to doe, and then i will shewyou how it is to be done: onely i must and doe confesse, that the mostdifficult thing of all the rest, is, to fasten on the taile, as thoushalt see.
gossip pietro and his wife, could hardly take any rest all the nightlong, so desirous they were to have the deed done; and thereforewhen it drew towards day, up they arose, and calling gossip john, hecame presently to them in his shirt, and being in the chamber withthem, he said. i know not any man in the world, to whom i woulddisclose this secret, but to you, and therefore because you soearnestly desire it, i am the more willing to doe it. onely you mustconsent, to doe whatsoever i say, if you are desirous to have it done.faithfully they ey ,h promised to performe all, whereupon johndelivering a lighted candle to gossip petro, to hold in his hand,said. marke well what i doe, and remember all the words i say: butbe very carefull, that whatsoever thou hearest or seest, thou doenot speake one word, for then the enchantment will be utterlyoverthrowne, onely wish that the taile may be well set on, for thereinconsisteth all the cunning.
gossip pietro holding the candle, and the woman being prepared asjohn had appointed her, she bowed her selfe forwardes with her handsset to the ground, even as if she stood upon foure feete. first withhis hands he touched her head and face, saying, heere is the goodlyhead of a mule: then handling her disheveld haire, termed them thegoodly mane of a mule. afterwardes, touching the body, armes, legs,and feete, gave them all the apt names (for those parts) belongingto a mule, nothing else remaining, but onely the forming of the taile,which when pietro perceived, how john was preparing to fasten it on(having no way misliked all his former proceeding:) he called tohim, saying: forbeare gossippe john, my mule shal have no taile atall, i am contented to have her without a taile.
how now gossip pietro? answered john, what hast thou done? thou hastmard all by this unadvised speaking, even when the worke was almostfully finished. it is no matter gossip (answered pietro) i can like mymule better without a taile, then to see it set on in such manner.
the fond yong woman, more covetously addicted to gayne andcommodity, then looking into the knavish intention of her gossip john;began to grow greatly offended.
beast as thou art (quoth she to her husband) why hast thouoverthrowne both thine owne good fortune and mine? diddest thou eversee a mule without a taile? wouldst thou have had him make me amonster? thou art wretchedly poore, and when we might have binenriched for ever, by a secret knowne to none but our selves, thou artthe asse that hast defeated all, and made thy friend to become thineenemy. gossippe john began to pacifie the woman, with solemneprotestations of his still continuing friendship, albeit(afterwards) there was no further desiring of any more mulemaking: butgossip pietro fel to his former trading onely with his asse, as he wasno lesse himselfe, and hee went no more with gossip john to the fairesin apuglia, neyther did he ever request, to have the like peece ofservice done for him.
although there was much laughing at this novell, the ladiesunderstanding it better, then dioneus intended that they should havedone, yet himselfe scarsely smiled. but the novels being all ended,and the sunne beginning to loose his heate; the queene also knowing,that the full period of her government was come: dispossessing herselfe of the crowne, shee placed it on the head of pamphilus, whowas the last of all to be honoured with this dignity; wherefore(with a gracious smile) thus she spake to him.
sir, it is no meane charge which you are to undergo, in makingamends (perhaps) for all the faults committed by my selfe and therest, who have gone before you in the same authority; and, may itprove as prosperous unto you, as i was willing to create you our king.pamphilus having received the honor with a chearfull mind, thusanswered. madam, your sacred vertues, and those (beside) remainingin my other subjects, will (no doubt) worke so effectually for me,that (as the rest have done) i shall deserve your generall goodopinion. and having given order to the master of the houshold (asall his predecessors had formerly done, for every necessaryoccasion; he turned to the ladies, who expected his gracious favour,and said.
bright beauties, it was the discretion of your late soveraigne andqueene, in regard of ease and recreation unto your tyred spirits, togrant you free liberty, for discoursing on whatsoever your selves bestpleased: wherefore, having enjoyed such a time of rest, i am ofopinion, that it is best to returne once more to our wonted law, inwhich respect, i would have every one to speake in this manner tomorrow. namety, of those men or women, who have done any thingbountifully or magnificently, either in matter of amity, or otherwise.the relation of such worthy arguments, wil (doubtlesse) give anaddition to our very best desires, for a free and forwardinclination to good actions, whereby our lives (how short soeverthey bee) may perpetuate an ever-living renowne and fame, after ourmortall bodies are converted into dust, which (otherwise)
are no better then those of bruite beasts, reason onelydistinguishing this difference, that as they live to perish utterly,so we respire to reigne in eternity. theame was exceedingly pleasingto the whole company; who being all risen, by permission of the newking, every one fel to their wonted recreations, as best agreed withtheir owne disposition; untill the houre for supper came, wherein theywere served very sumptuously. but being risen from the table, theybegan their dances, among which, many sweet sonnets were enterlaced,with such delicate tunes as moved admiration. then the kingcommanded madam neiphila, to sing a song in his name, or how her selfestood best affected. and immediatly with a cleare and rare voice, thusshe began.
the song
the chorus sung by all the companie
in the spring season,
maides have best reason,
to dance and sing;
with chaplets of flowers,
to decke up their bowers,
and all in honour of the spring.
i heard a nimph that sate alone,
by a fountaines side:
much her hard fortune to bemone,
for still she cride:
ah! who will pitty her distresse,
that findes no foe like ficklenesse?
for truth lives not in men:
poore soule, why live i then?
in the spring season, etc.
oh, how can mighty love permit,
such a faithlesse deed,
and not in justice punish it
as treasons meed?
i am undone through perjury,
although i loved constantly:
but truth lives not in men,
poore soule, why live i then?
in the spring season, etc.
when i did follow dyans traine,
as a loyall maide,
i never felt oppressing paine,
nor was dismaide.
but when i listened loves alluring,
then i wandred from assuring.
for truth lives not in men:
poore soule, why live i then?
in the spring season, etc.
adiew to all my former joyes,
when i lived at ease,
and welcome now those sad annoies
which do most displease.
and let none pitty her distresse,
that fell not, but by ficklenesse,
for truth lives not in men,
alas! why live i then?
in the spring season,
maides have best reason,
to dance and sing;
with chaplets of flowers,
to decke up their bowers,
and all in honour of the spring.this song, most sweetly sung by madame neiphila, was especiallycommended, both by the king, and all the rest of the ladies. whichbeing fully finished, the king gave oder, that everie one shouldrepaire to their chambers, because a great part of the night wasalready spent.
the induction to the tenth and last day
whereon, under the government of pamphilus, the severall
arguments do concerne such persons, as either by way of
liberality, or in magnificent manner, performed any worthy
action, for love, favour, friendship, or any other
honourable occasion
already began certaine small clouds in the west, to blush with avermillion tincture, when those in the east (having reached to theirfull heighth) looked like bright burnished gold, by splendour of thesun beames drawing neere unto them: when pamphilus being risen, causedthe ladies, and the rest of his honourable companions to be called.when they were all assembled, and had concluded together on the place,whither they should walke for their mornings recreation: the kingledde on the way before accompanied with the two noble ladiesphilomena and fiammetta, all the rest following after them,devising, talking, and answering to divers demands both what thatday was to be don, as also concerning the proposed imposition forthe forthcoming day.
after they had walked an indifferent space of time, and found therayes of the sunne to be over-piercing for them: they returned backeagaine to the pallace, as fearing to have their blood immoderatelyheated. then rinsing their glasses in the coole cleare runningcurrent, each tooke their mornings draught, and then walked into themilde shades about the garden, untill they should bee summoned todinner. which was no sooner over-past, and such as slept, returnedwaking: they mette together againe in their wonted place, according asthe king had appointed, where he gave command unto madame neiphila,that shee should (for that day) begin the first novell, which shehumbly accepting, thus began.
the tenth day, the first novell
wherin may evidently be discerned, that servants to princes and
great lords, are many times recompenced, rather by their good
fortune, then in any regard of their dutifull services
a florentine knight, named signior rogiero de figiovanni, became aservant to alphonso, king of spaine, who (in his owne opinion)seemed but sleightly to respect and reward him. in regard whereof,by a notable experiment, the king gave him a manifest testimony,that it was not through any defect in him, but onely occasioned by theknights ill fortune; most bountifully recompencing him afterward.
i doe accept it (worthy ladies) as no mean favour, that the kinghath given me the first place, to speake of such an honourableargument, as bounty and magnificence is, which precious jewell, evenas the sunne is the beauty, or ornament and bright glory of al heaven;so is bounty and magnificence the crowne of all vertues. i shallthen recount to you a short novell, sufficiently pleasing, in mineowne opinion, and i hope (so much i dare rely on your judgements) bothprofitable, and worthy to be remembred.
you are to know then, that among other valiant knights, which oflong have lived in our city, one of them, and (perhappes) of asgreat merit as any, was one, named signior rogiero d'figiovanni. hebeing rich, of great courage, and perceiving, that (in dueconsideration) the quality belonging to life, and the customesobserved among our tuscanes, were not answerable to his expectation,nor agreed with the disposition of his valour; determined to leave hisnative countrey, and belong in service (for some time) to alfonso,king of spaine, whose fame was generally noised in all places, forexcelling all other princes in those times, for respect of mens welldeservings, and bountifull requitall of their paines. being providedin honorable order, both of horses, armes, and a competent train, hetravelled to spaine, where he was worthily entertained.
signior rogiero continuing there, living in honorable maner, andperforming many admirable actions of arms; in short time he madehimselfe sufficiently knowne, for a very valiant and famous man. andhaving remained an indifferent long while, observing divers behavioursin the king: he saw, how enclined himselfe first to one man, thenanother, bestowing on one a castle, a towne on another, andbaronnies on divers, som-what indiscreetly, as giving away bountifulto men of no merit. and restraining all his favors from him, asseeming close fisted, and parting with nothing: he took it as adiminishing of his former reputation, and a great empayring of hisfame, wherefore he resolved on his departure thence, and made his suitto the king that he might obtaine it. the king did grant it, bestowingon him one of the very best mules, and the goodliest that ever wasbackt, a gift most highly pleasing to rogiero, in regarde of thelong journy he intended to ride. which being delivcrd, the king gavecharge to one of his gentlemen, to compasse such convenient meanes, asto ride thorow the country, and in the company of signior rogiero, yetin such manner, as he should not perceive, that the king had purposelysent him so to do. respectively he should observe whatsoever he saidconcerning the king, his gesture, smiles, and other behavior,shaping his answers accordingly, and on the nexte morning to commandhis returne backe with him to the king.
nor was the gentleman slacke in this command, but noting rogieroesdeparting forth of the city, he mounted on horseback likewise, andimmediatly after came into his company, making him beleeve, that hejournied towards italy. rogiero rode on the mule which the king hadgiven him, with diversity of speeches passing between them. aboutthree of the clocke in the afternoone, the gentleman said. it were notamisse sir, (having such fit opportunitie), to stable our horses for awhile, till the heate be a little more overpast. so taking an inne,and the horses being in the stable, they all staled except the mule.
being mounted againe, and riding on further, the gentleman duelyobserved whatsoever rogiero spake, and comming to the passage of asmall river or brooke: the rest of the beasts dranke, and not themule, but staled in the river: which signior rogiero seeing,clapping his hands on the mules mane, hee said. what a wicked beastart thou? thou art just like thy master that gave thee to mee. thegentleman committed the words to memory, as he did many otherpassing from rogiero, riding along the rest of the day, yet none indisparagement of the king, but rather highly in his commendation.and being the next morning mounted on horseback, seeming to hold onstill the way for tuscane: the gentleman fulfilled the kingscommand, causing signior rogiero to turne back againe with him,which willingly he yeelded to doe.
when they were come to the court, and the king made acquaintedwith the words, which rogiero spake to his mule; he was called intothe presence, where the king shewed him a gracious countenance, anddemanded of him, why he had compared him to his mule? signiorrogiero nothing daunted, but with a bold and constant spirit, thusanswered. sir, i made the comparison, because, like as you give, wherethere is no conveniency, and bestow nothing where reason requireth:even so, the mule would not stale where she should have done, butwhere was water too much before, there she did it. beleeve mesignior rogiero, replyed the king, if i have not given you such gifts,as (perhaps) i have done to divers other, farre inferiour to you inhonour and merit; this happened not thorough any ignorance in me, asnot knowing you to be a most valiant knight, and well-worthy ofspeciall respect: but rather through your owne ill fortune, whichwould not suffer me to doe it, whereof she is guilty, and not i, asthe truth thereof shall make it selfe apparant to you. sir, answeredrogiero, i complaine not, because i have received no gift from you, asdesiring thereby covetously to become the richer: but in regard youhave not as yet any way acknowledged, what vertue is remaining inme. neverthelesse, i allow your excuse for good and reasonable, and amheartely contented, to behold whatsoever you please; although i doeconfidently credit you, without any other testimony.the king conducted him then into the great hall, where (as hee hadbefore given order) stood two great chests, fast lockt; in thepresence of all his lords, the king thus spake. signior rogiero, inone of these chests is mine imperiall crowne, the scepter royall,the mound, and many more of my richest girdles, rings, plate, andjewels, even the very best that are mine: the other is full of earthonely. chuse one of these two, and which thou makest election of; uponmy royall word thou shalt enjoy it. hereby shalt thou evidentlyperceive, who hath bin ingreatful to the deservings, either i, orthine owne bad fortune. rogiero seeing it was the kings pleasure tohave it so; chose one of them, which the king caused presently to beopened, it approving to be the same that was full of earth, whereatthe king smyling, said thus unto him. you see signior rogiero, thatwhat i said concerning your ill fortune, is very true: butquestionlesse, your valour is of such desert, as i ought to opposemy selfe against all her malevolence. and because i know right, thatyou are not minded to become a spaniard; i will give you neithercastle nor dwelling place: but will bestow the chest on you (in meerdespight of your malicious fortune) which she so unjustly tooke awayfrom you. carry it home with you into your countrey, that there it maymake an apparant testimoney, in the sight of all your well-willers,both of your owne vertuous deservings, and my bounty. signiorrogiero humbly receiving the chest, and thanking his majestie for soliberall a gift, returned home joyfully therewith, into his nativecountrey of tuscane.
the tenth day, the second novell
wherein is declared that good men doe sometimes fall into bad
conditions, onely occasioned thereto by necessity: and what
meanes are to be used, for their reducing to goodnesse
againe
ghinotto di tacco; tooke the lord abbot of clugni as his prisoner,and cured him of a grievous disease, which he had in his stomacke, andafterwards set him at libert. the same lord abbot when hee returnedfrom the court rome, reconciled ghinotto to pope boniface; who madehim a knight, and lord prior of a goodly hospitall.
the magnificence and royall bounty, which king alphonso bestowedon the florentine knight, passed through the whole assembly withmean applause, and the king (who gave the greatest praise of al)commanded madame eliza, to take the second turne in order;whereupon, thus she began. faire ladies, if a king shewed himselfemagnificently minded, and expressed his liberall bounty to such a man,as had done him good and honourable services: it can be termed no morethen a vertuous deed well done, and becomming a king. but what will wesay, when we heare that a prelate of the church, shewed himselfewondrously magnificent, and to such a one as was his enemy: can anymalicious tongue speake ill of him? undoubtedly, no other answere isto be made, but the action of the king was meerely vertue, and that ofthe prelate, no lesse then a miracle: for how can it be otherwise,when they are more greedily covetous then women, and deadly enemies toall liberality? and although every man (naturally) desireth revengefor injuries and abuses done unto him: yet men of the church, inregard that dayly they preached patience, and commaund (above allthings else) remission of sinnes: it would appeare a mighty blemish inthem, to be more froward and furious then other men. but i am tospeake of a reverend prelate of the church, as also concerning hismunificent bounty, to one that was his enemy, and yet became hisreconciled friend, as you shall perceive by my novell.
ghinotto di tacco, for his insolent and stout robberies, became aman very farre famed, who being banished from sienna, and an enemyto the countes disanta flore: prevailed so by his bold andheadstrong perswasions, that the towne of raticonfani rebelled againstthe church of rome, wherein he remaining; all passengers whatsoever,travelling any way thereabout, were robde and rifled by his theevingcompanions. at the time whereof now i speake, boniface the eight,governed as pope at rome, and the lord abbot of clugni (accounted tobe one of the richest prelates in the world) came to rome, and thereeither by some surfeit, excesse of feeding, or otherwise, his stomackebeing grievously offended and pained; the phisitians advised him, totravell to the bathes at sienna, where he should receive immediatecure. in which respect, his departure being licenced by the pope, toset onward thither, with great and pompous cariages, of horses, mules,and a goodly traine, without hearing any rumour of the theevishconsorts.
ghinotto di tacco, being advertised of his comming, spred abouthis scouts and nettes, and without missing so much as one page, shutup the abbot, with all his traine and baggage, in a place of narrowrestraint, out of which he could by no meanes escape. when this wasdone, he sent one of his most sufficient attendants (well accompanyed)to the lord abbot, who said to him in his masters name, that if hislordship were so pleased, hee might come and visite ghinotto at hiscastle. which the abbot hearing, answered chollerickly, that hewould not come thither, because hee had nothing to say to ghinotto:but meant to proceed on in his journy, and would faine see, whodurst presume to hinder his passe. to which rough words, the messengerthus mildely answered. my lord (quoth he) you are arrived in such aplace, where we feare no other force, but the all-controlling power ofheaven, clearely exempted from the popes thunder-cracks, ofmaledictions, interdictions, excommunications, or whatsoever else: andtherefore it would bee much better for you, if you pleased to do asghinotto adviseth you.
during the time of this their interparlance, the place wassuddenly round ingirt with strongly armed theeves, and the lordabbot perceiving, that both he and all his followers were surprized:tooke his way (though very impatiently) towards the castle, andlikewise all his company and carriages with him. being dismounted, heewas conducted (as ghinotto had appointed) all alone, into a smallchamber of the castle, it being very darke and uneasie: but the restof his traine, every one according to his ranck and quality, wereall well lodged in the castle, their horses, goods and all thingselse, delivered into secure keeping, without the least touch of injuryor prejudice. all which being orderly done, ghinotto himselfe wentto the lord abbot, and said. my lord, ghinotto, to whom you are awelcome guest, requesteth, that it might be your pleasure to tell him,whither you are travelling, and upon what occasion?
the lord abbot being a very wise man, and his angry distemper moremoderately qualified; revealed whither he went, and the cause of hisgoing thither. which when ghinotto had heard, hee departed courteouslyfrom him, and began to consider with himselfe, how he might cure theabbot; yet without any bathe. so, commanding a good fire to be keptcontinually in his small chamber, and very good attendance on him: thenext morning, he came to visite him againe, bringing a faire whitenapkin on his arme, and in it two slices or toasts of fine manchet,a goodly cleare glasse, full of the purest white-bastard ofcorniglia (but indeed, of the abbots owne provision brought thitherwith him) and then hee spoke to him in this manner.
my lord, when ghinotto was yonger then now he is, he studyedphysicke, and he commanded me to tell you, that the very bestmedicine, he could ever learne, against any disease in the stomacke,was this which he had provided for your lordship, as an especialpreparative, and which he should finde to be very comfortable. theabbot, who had a better stomacke to eate, then any will or desire totalke: although hee did it somewhat disdainfully, yet hee eate up boththe toastes, and roundly dranke the glasse of bastard. afterward,divers other speeches passed betweene them, the one still advisingin phisicall manner, and the other seeming to care little for it:but moved many questions concerning ghinotto, and earnestly requestingto see him. such speeches as savoured of the abbots discontentment,and came from him in passion; were clouded with courteousacceptance, and not the least signe of any mislike: but assuring hislordship, that ghinotto intended very shortly to see him, and sothey parted for that time.nor returned he any more, till the next morning with the like twotoastes of bread, and such another glasse of white bastard, as hehad brought him at the first, continuing the same course for diversdayes after: till the abbot had eaten (and very hungerly too) a prettystore of dryed beanes, which ghinotto purposely, (yet secretly) hadhidden in the chamber. whereupon he demaunded of him (as seeming to beso enjoyned by his pretended master) in what temper he found hisstomacke now? i should finde my stomacke well enough (answered thelord abbot) if i could get forth of thy masters fingers, and then havesome good food to feed on: for his medicines have made me so soundlystomackt, that i am ready to starve with hunger.
when ghinotto was gone from him, hee then prepared a very fairechamber for him, adorning it with the abbots owne rich hangings, asalso his plate and other moveables, such as were alwayes used forhis service. a costly dinner he provided likewise, whereto heinvited divers of the towne, and many of the abbots chiefestfollowers: then going to him againe the next morning, he said. mylord, seeing you doe feele your stomacke so well, it is time youshould come forth of the infirmary. and taking him by the hand, hebrought him into the prepared chamber, where he left him with his ownepeople, and went to give order for the dinners serving in, that itmight be performed in magnificent manner.
the lord abbot recreated himselfe a while with his owne people, towhom he recounted, the course of his life since hee saw them; and theylikewise told him, how kindly they had bin initeated by ghinotto.but when dinner time was come, the lord abbot and all his company,were served with costly viands and excellent wines, without ghinottoesmaking himselfe knowne to the abbot: till after he had beeneentertained some few dayes in this order: into the great hall of thecastle, ghinotto caused all the abbots goods and furniture to beebrought, and likewise into a spacious court, wheron the windowes ofthe said court gazed, all his mules and horses, with their sumpters,even to the very silliest of them, which being done, ghinotto wentto the abbot, and demaunded of him, how he felt his stomacke now,and whether it would serve him to venter on horsebacke as yet, orno? the lord abbot answered, that he found his stomacke perfectlyrecovered, his body strong enough to endure travell, and all thingswell, so hee were delivered from ghinotto.
hereupon, he brought him into the hall where his furniture was, asalso all his people, and commanding a window to be opned, wherat hemight behold his horses, he said. my lord, let me plainely give you tounderstand, that neither cowardise, or basenesse of minde, inducedghinotto di tacco (which is my selfe) to become a lurking robber onthe high-wayes, an enemy to the pope, and so (consequently) to theromane court: but onely to save his owne life and honour knowinghimselfe to be a gentleman cast out of his owne house, and having(beside) infinite enemies. but because you seeme to be a worthylord, i will not (although i have cured your stomacks disease) dealewith you as i doe to others, whose goods (when they fall into mypower) i take such part of as i please: but rather am wellcontented, that my necessities being considered by your selfe, youspare me out a proportion of the things you have heere, answerableto your owne liking. for all are present here before you, both in thishall, and in the court beneath, free from any spoyle, or the leastimpairing. wherefore, give a part, or take all, if you please, andthen depart hence when you will, or abide heere still, for now you areat your owne free liberty.
the lord abbot wondred not a little, that a robber on the highwayes, should have such a bold and liberall spirit, which appearedvery pleasing to him; and instantly, his former hatred and spleeneagainst ghinotto, became converted into cordiall love and kindnes,so that (imbracing him in his armes) he said. i protest upon my vowmade to religion, that to win the love of such a man, as i plainelyperceive thee to be: i would undergo far greater injuries, thenthose which i have received at thy hands. accursed be cruelldestiny, that forced thee to so base a kind of life, and did notblesse thee with a fairer fortune. after he had thus spoken, he leftthere the greater part of all his goods, and returned backe againeto rome, with few horses, and a meaner traine.
during these passed accidents, the pope had received intelligence ofthe lord abbots surprizall, which was not a little displeasing to him:but when he saw him returned, he demaunded, what benefit he receivedat the bathes? whereto the abbot, merrily smyling, thus replyed.holy father, i met with a most skilfull physitian neerer hand, whoseexperience is beyond the power of the bathes, for by him i am veryperfectly cured: and so discoursed all at large. the pope laughingheartely, and the abbot continuing on still his report; moved withan high and magnificent courage, he demaunded one gracious favour ofthe pope: who imagining that he would request a matter of greatermoment, then he did, freely offered to grant, whatsoever he desired.
holy father, answered the lord abbot, all the humble suit which imake to you, is, that you would be pleased to receive into yourgrace and favor, ghinotto di tacco my physitian, because among all thevertuous men, deserving to have especial account made of them inever met with any equall to him both in honour and honesty.whatsoever injury he did to me, i impute it as a greater in-fortune,then any way he deserveth to be charged withall. which wretchedcondition of his, if you were pleased to alter, and bestow on him somebetter meanes of maintenance, to live like a worthy man, as he is nolesse: i make no doubt, but (in very short time) hee will appeare aspleasing to your holinesse, as (in my best judgement) i thinke himto be.
the pope, who was of a magnanimious spirit, and one that highlyaffected men of vertue, hearing the commendable motion made by theabbot; returned answere, that he was as willing to grant it, as theother desired it, sending letters of safe conduct for his commingthither. ghinotto receiving such assurance from the court of rome,came thither immediatly, to the great joy of the lord abbot: and thepope finding him to be a man of valor and worth, uponreconciliation, remitted all former errors, creating him knight, andlord prior of the very chiefest hospitall in rome. in which officehe lived long time after, as a loyall servant to the church, and anhonest thankefull friend to the lord abbot of clugny.
the tenth day, the third novell
shewing in an excellent and lively demonstration, that any
especiall honourable vertue, persevering and dwelling in a
truly noble soule, cannot be violenced or confounded, by the
most politicke attemptes of malice and envy
mithridanes envying the life and liberality of nathan, andtravelling thither, with a setled resolution to kill him: chaunceth toconferre with nathan unknowne. and being instructed by him, in whatmanner he might best performe the bloody deede, according as heegave direction, hee meeteth with him in a small thicket or woode,where knowing him to be the same man, that taught him how to take awayhis life: confounded with shame, hee acknowledgeth his horribleintention, and becommeth his loyall friend.
it appeared to the whole assembly, that they had heard a matter ofmervaile, for a lord abbot to performe any magnificent action: buttheir admiration ceasing in silence, the king commanded philostratusto follow next, who forthwith thus began.
honourable ladies, the bounty and magnificense of alphonso king ofspaine, was great and that done by the lord great in abbot ofclugny, a thing (perhaps) never heard of in any other. but it willseeme no lesse mervailous to you, when you heare, how one man, inexpression of great liberality to another man, that earnestlydesired to kill him; should bee secretly disposed to give him hislife, which had bin lost, if the other would have taken it, as ipurpose to acquaint you withall, in a short novell.
most certaine it is, at least, if faith may bee given to thereport of certaine genewayes, and other men resorting to thoseremote parts, that in the country of cathaya, there lived somtime agentleman, rich beyond comparison, and named nathan. he having hisliving adjoyning to a great common rode-way, whereby men travayledfrom the east to the west (as they did the like from the west unto theeast, as having no other means of passage) and being of a bountifulland chearfull disposition, which he was willing to make knowen byexperience: he summoned together many master masons and carpenters,and there erected (in a short time) one of the greatest, goodliest,and most beautifull houses (in manner of a princes pallace) thatever was seene in all those quarters.
with movables and all kinde of furnishment, befitting a house ofsuch outward apparance, hee caused it to be plentifully stored onelyto receive, entertaine, and honor all gentlemen or other travailerswhatsoever, as had occasion to passe that way, being not unprovidedalso of such a number of servants, as might continuallie giveattendance on all commers and goers. two and fifty severall gates,standing alway wide open, and over each of them in great goldencarracters was written, welcome, welcome, and gave free admission toall commers whatsoever.
in this honourable order (observed as his estated custom) hepersevered so long a while, as not onely the east parts, but alsothose in the west, were every where acquainted with his fame andrenown. being already well stept into yeares, but yet not wearie(therefore) of his great charge and liberality: it fortuned, thatthe rumor of his noble hospitality, came to the eare of anothergallant gentleman, named mithridanes, living in a countrey not farreoff from the other.
this gentleman, knowing himselfe no lesse wealthy then nathan, andenviously repining at his vertue and liberality, determined in hismind, to dim and obscure the others bright splendor, by makinghimselfe farre more famous. and having built a palace answerable tothat of nathans, with like windings of gates, and welcom inscriptions;he beganne to extend immeasurable courtesies, unto all such as weredisposed to visite him: so that (in a short while) hee grew veryfamous in infinite places. it chanced on a day, as mithridanes sateall alone within the goodly court of his pallace: a poore woman entredat one of the gates, craving an almes of him, which she had; andreturned in againe at a second gate, comming also to him, and had asecond almes; continuing so still a dozen times; but at the thirteenthreturning, mithridanes saide to her: good woman, you goe and come veryoften, and still you are served with almes. when the old woman heardthese words, she said. o the liberality of nathan! how honourableand wonderfull is that? i have past through two and thirty gates ofhis palace, even such as are here, and at every one i receyved analmes, without any knowledgement taken of me, either by him, or any ofhis followers: and heere i have past but through thirteene gates,and am there both acknowledged and taken. farewell to this house,for i never meane to visit it any more; with which words shee departedthence, and never after came thither againe.
when mithridanes had a while pondered on her speeches, hee waxedmuch discontented, as taking the words of the olde woman, to extollthe renowne of nathan, and darken or ecclipse his glorie, whereupon hesaid to himselfe. wretched man as i am, when shall i attaine to theheight of liberality, and performe such wonders, as nathan doth? inseeking to surmount him, i cannot come neere him in the verymeanest. undoubtedly, i spend all my endeavour but in vaine, excepti rid the world of him, which (seeing his age will not make an endof him) i must needs do with my own hands. in which furious and bloodydetermination (without revealing his intent to any one) he mountedon horse-backe, with few attendants in his company, and after threedayes journey, arrived where nathan dwelt. he gave order to his men,to make no shew of beeing his servants, or any way to acknowledge him:but to provide them selves of convenient lodgings, untill they heardother tydings from him.
about evening, and (in this manner) alone by himselfe, neere tothe palace of nathan, he met him solitarily walking, not in pompousapparrell, whereby to bee distinguished from a meaner man: and,because he knew him not, neyther had heard any relation of hisdescription, he demanded of him, if he knew where nathan then was?nathan, with a chearfull countenance, thus replyed. faire syr, thereis no man in these parts, that knoweth better how to shew you nathanthen i do; and therefore, if you be so pleased, i will bring you tohim. mithridanes said, therein he should do him a great kindnesse:albeit (if it were possible) he would bee neyther knowne nor seeneof nathan. and that (quoth he) can i also do sufficiently for you,seeing it is your will to have it so, if you will goe along with me.
dismounting from his horse, he walked on with nathan, diverslydiscoursing, untill they came to the pallace, where one of theservants taking mithridanes his horse, nathan rounded the fellow inthe eare, that he should give warning to al. throughout the house, forrevealing to the gentleman, that he was nathan; as accordingly itwas performed. no sooner were they within the pallace, but heconducted mithridanes into a goodly chamber, wher none (as yet) hadseene him, but such as were appointed to attend on him reverently;yea, and he did himselfe greatly honor him, as being loth to leave hiscompany.
while thus mithridanes conversed with him, he desired to know(albeit he respected him much for his yeares) what he was. introthsir, answered nathan, i am one of the meanest servants to nathan,and from my child-hood, have made my selfe thus olde in his service:yet never hath he bestowed any other advancement on mee, then as younow see; in which respect, howsoever other men may commend him, yeti have no reason at all to do it. these words, gave some hope tomithridanes, that with a little more counsell, he might securely putin execution his wicked determination. nathan likewise demaunded ofhim (but in very humble manner) of whence, and what he was, as alsothe businesse inviting him thither: offering him his utmost aide andcounsell, in what soever consisted in his power.
mithridanes sat an indifferent while meditating with his thoghtsbefore ie would returne any answer: but at the last, concluding torepose confidence in him (in regard of his pretended discontentment)with many circumstantial perswasions, first for fidelity, next forconstancie, and lastly for counsell and assistance, he declared to himtruly what he was, the cause of his comming thither, and the reasonurging him thereto. nathan hearing these words, and the detestabledeliberation of mithridanes, became quite changed in himself: yetwisely making no outward appearance thereof, with a bold courage andsetled countenance, thus he replyed.
mithridanes, thy father was a noble gentleman, and (in vertuousqualities) inferiour to none, from whom (as now i see) thou desirestnot to degenerate, having undertaken so bold and high an enterprise, imeane, in being liberall and bountifull to all men. i do greatlycommend the envy which thou bearest to the vertue of nathan: becauseif there were many more such men, the world that is now wretched andmiserable, would become good and conformable. as for the determinationwhich thou hast disclosed to mee, i have sealed it up secretly in mysoule: wherein i can better give thee counsell, then any especiallhelpe or furtherance: and the course which i would have thee toobserve, followeth thus in few words.
this window, which we now looke forth at, sheweth thee a smal woodor thicket of trees, being litle more then the quarter of a milesdistance hence; whereto nathan usually walketh every morning, andthere continueth time long enough: there maist thou very easily meethim, and do whatsoever thou intendest to him. if thou kilst him,because thou maist with safety returne home unto thine owne abiding,take not the same way which guided thee thither, but another, lying onthe left hand, and directing speedily out of the wood, as being not somuch haunted as the other, but rather free from all resort, and surestfor visiting thine owne countrey, after such a dismall deed is done.
when mithridanes had receyved this instruction, and nathan wasdeparted from him; hee secretly gave intelligence to his men, (wholikewise were lodged, as welcom strangers, in the same house) atwhat place they should stay for him the next morning. night beingpassed over, and nathan risen, his heart altred not a jot from hiscounsel given to mithridanes, much lesse changed from anie partthereof: but all alone by himselfe, walked on to the wood, the placeappointed for his death. mithridanes also being risen, taking hisbow and sword (for other weapons had he none) mounted on horsbacke,and so came to the wood, where (somewhat farre off) hee espyednathan walking, and no creature with him. dismounting from hishorse, he had resolved (before he would kill him) not onely to see,but also to heare him speake: so stepping roughly to him, and takinghold of the bonnet on his head, his face being then turned from him,he sayde. old man, thou must dye. whereunto nathan made no otheranswer, but thus: why then (belike) i have deserved it.
when mithridanes heard him speake, and looked advisedly on his face,he knew him immediately to be the same man, that had entertained himso lovingly, conversed with him so familiarly, and counselled him sofaithfully: all which overcomming his former fury, his harsh naturebecame meerly confounded with shame: so throwing downe his drawnesword, which he held readily prepared for the deede: he prostratedhimselfe at nathans feet, and in teares, spake in this manner. nowdo i manifestly know (most loving father) your admired bounty andliberalitie; considering, with what industrious providence, you madethe meanes for your comming hither, prodigally to bestow your lifeon me, which i have no right unto, although you were so willing topart with it. but those high and supreame powers, more carefull ofmy dutie, then i my selfe: even at the very instant, and when it wasmost needfull, opened the eyes of my better understanding, whichinternall envy had closed up before. and therefore, looke how much youhave bin forward to pleasure me; so much the more shame andpunishment, i confesse my heinous transgression hath justlydeserved: take therefore on me (if you please) such revenge, as youthinke (in justice) answerable to my sin.
nathan lovingly raised mithridanes from the ground, then kissing hischeeke, and tenderly embracing him, he said. sonne, thou needest notto aske, much less to obtaine pardon, for any enterprise of thine,which thou canst not yet terme to be good or bad: because thousoughtest not to bereave me of my life, for any hatred thou barest me,but onely in coveting to be reputed the woorthier man. take thenthis assurance of me, and beleeve it constantly, that there is noman living, whom i love and honour, as i do thee: considering thegreatnesse of thy minde, which consisteth not in the heaping up ofmoney, as wretched and miserable worldlings make it their onelyfelicity; but, contending in bounty to spend what is thine, didst holdit for no shame to kil me, thereby to make thy selfe so much themore worthily famous.
nor is it any matter to be wondred at, in regard that emperors,and the greatest kings, hadde never made such extendure of theirdominions, and consequently of their renowne, by any other art, thenkilling; yet not one man onely, as thou wouldst have done: butinfinite numbers, burning whole countries, and making desolate hugetownes and cities, onely to enlarge their dominion, and furtherspreading of their fame. wherefore, if for the increasing of thineowne renowne, thou wast desirous of my death: it is no matter ofnovelty, and therefore deserving the lesse mervaile, seeing men areslaine daily, and all for one purpose or other.
mithridanes, excusing no further his malevolent deliberation, butrather commending the honest defence, which nathan made on hisbehalfe; proceeded so farre in after discoursing, as to tel himplainely, that it did wondrously amaze him, how he durst come to thefatall appointed place, himselfe having so exactly plotted andcontrived his owne death: whereunto nathan returned this aunswere.
i would not have thee mithridanes, to wonder at my counsel ordetermination; because, since age hath made mee maister of mine ownewill, and i resolved to doe that, wherein thou hast begun to followme: never came any man to mee, whom i did not content (if i could)in any thing he demanded of me. it was thy fortune to come for mylife, which when i saw thee so desirous to have it, i resolvedimmediately to bestow it on thee: and so much the rather, because thoushouldst not be the onely man, that ever departed hence, withoutenjoying whatsoever hee demanded. and, to the end thou mightst themore assuredly have it, i gave thee that advice, least by not enjoyingmine, thou shouldest chance to loose thine owne. i have had the use ofit full fourescore yeares, with the consummation of all my delightsand pleasures: and well i know, that according to the course of nature(as it fares with other men, and generally all things else) itcannot bee long before it must leave mee.
wherefore, i hold it much better for me to give it away freely, as ihave alwayes done my goods and treasure; then bee curious in keepingit, and suffer it to be taken from me (whether i will or no) bynature. a small gift it is, if time make me up the full summe of anhundred yeares: how miserable is it then, to stand beholding but forfoure or five, and all of them vexation too? take it then i intreatethee, if thou wilt have it; for i never met with any man before (butthy selfe) that di desire it, nor (perhaps) shall finde any other torequest it: for the longer i keepe it, the worse it wil be esteemed:and before it grow contemptible, take it i pray thee.
mithridanes, being exceedingly confounded with shame, bashfullysayde: fortune fore-fend, that i should take away a thing soprecious as your life is, or once to have so vile a thought of it aslately i had; but rather then i would diminish one day thereof, icould wish, that my time might more amply enlarge it. forthwithaunswered nathan, saying. wouldst thou (if thou couldst) shorten thineowne dayes, onely to lengthen mine? why then thou wouldest have meto do that to thee, which (as yet) i never did unto any man, namely,robbe thee, to enrich my selfe. i will enstruct thee in a muchbetter course, if thou wilt be advised by mee. lusty and young, as nowthou art, thou shalt dwell heere in my house, and be called by thename of nathan. aged, and spent with yeares, as thou seest i am, iwill goe live in thy house, and bee called by the name of mithridanes.so, both the name and place shall illustrate thy glorie, and i livecontentedly, without the very least thought of envie.
deare father, answered mithridanes, if i knew so well howe to directmine owne actions, as you doe, and alwayes have done, i would gladlyaccept your most liberall offer: but because i plainlie perceive, thatmy very best endeavours, must remayne darkened by the bright renowneof nathan: i will never seeke to impayre that in another, which icannot (by any means) increase in my selfe, but (as you haveworthily taught me) live contented with my owne condition.
after these, and many more like loving speeches had passed betweenthem; according as nathan very instantly requested, mithridanesreturned back with him to the pallace, where many dayes he highlyhonored and respected him, comforting and counselling him, to perseveralwayes in his honourable determination. but in the end, whenmithridanes could abide there no longer, because necessary occasionscalled him home: he departed thence with his men, having found by goodexperience, that hee could never goe beyond nathan in liberality.
the tenth day, the fourth novell
wherein is shewne, that true love hath alwayes bin, and so still
is, the occasion of many great and worthy courtesies
signior gentile de carisendi, being come from modena, took agentlewoman, named madam catharina, forth of a grave, wherin she wasburied for dead: which act he did, in regard of his former honestaffection to the said gentlewoman. madame catharina remaining thereafterward, and delivered of a goodly sonne: was (by signior gentile)delivered to her owne husband, named signior nicolucciocaccianimico, and the yong infant with her.
by judgment of all the honorable assembly, it was reputedwonderfull, that a man should be so bountifull, as to give away hisowne life, and to his hatefull enemy. in which respect, it passed withgenerall affirmation, that nathan (in the vertue of liberallity) hadexceeded alphonso, king of spain, but (especially) the abbot ofclugny. so, after every one had delivered their opinion, the king,turning himselfe to madame lauretta, gave her such a signe, as wellinstructed her understanding, that she should be the next in order,whereto she gladly yeelding, began in this manner.
youthfull ladies, the discourses already past, have been so worthyand magnificent, yea, reaching to such a height of glorious splendour;as (me thinkes) there remaineth no more matter, for us that are yet tospeake, whereby to enlarge so famous an argument, and in such manneras it ought to be: except we lay hold on the actions of love,wherein is never any want of subject, it is so faire and spacious afield to walke in. wherefore, as well in behalfe of the one, asadvancement of the other, whereto our instant age is most of allinclined: i purpose to acquaint you with a generous and magnificentact, of an amourous gentleman, which when it shall be duely consideredon, perhaps will appeare equall to any of the rest. at least, if itmay passe for currant, that men may give away their treasures, forgivemighty injuries, and lay downe life it selfe, honour and renowne(which is farre greater) to infinite dangers, only to attaine anything esteemed and affected.
understand then (gracious hearers) that in bologna, a very famouscity of lombardicy there lived sometime a knight, most highlyrespected for his vertues, named signior gentile de carisendi, who (inhis yonger dayes) was enamoured of a gentlewoman, called madamcatharina, the wife of signior nicoluccio caccianimico. and becauseduring the time of his amourous pursuite, he found but a sorryenterchange of affection from the lady; hee went (as hopelesse ofany successe) to be potestate of modena, whereto he was called byplace and order.
at the same time, signior nicoluccio being absent from bologna,and his lady at a farme-house of his in the countrey (about threemiles distant from the city) because she was great with child,; andsomewhat neere the time of her teeming: it came to passe, that somedangerous accident befell her, which was so powerfull in operation, asno signe of life appeared remained in her, but she was reputed (evenin the judgement of the best phisitians, whereof she wanted noattendance) to be verily dead. and because in the opinion of herparents and neerest kinred, the time for her deliverance was yet sofarre off, as the infant within her, wanted much of a perfectcreature: they made the lesse mourning; but in the next church, asalso the vault belonging to her ancestors, they gave her buriallvery speedily.
which tydings comming to the hearing of signior gentile, by one thatwas his endeared friend: although (while she lived) he could neverbe gracious n her favour, yet her so sudden death did greatly grievehim, whereupon he discoursed in this sort with himselfe. dearemadame catharina, i am not a little sorry for thy death, although(during thy life-time) i was scarcely worthy of one kind looke: yetnow being dead, thou canst not prohibite me, but i may robbe thee of akisse. no sooner had hee spoke the words, but it beeing then night,and taking such order, as none might know of his departure: heemounted on horsebacke, accompanied onely with one servant, andstayed no where, till hee came to the vault where the lady was buried.which when he had opened, with instruments convenient for the purpose,he descended downe into the vault, and kneeled downe by the beerewhereon she lay, and in her wearing garments, according to theusuall manner; with teares trickling mainly downe his cheekes, hebestowed infinite sweet kisses on her.
but as we commonly see, that mens desires are never contented, butstill will presume on further advantages, especially such as loveentirely: so fared it with gentile, who being once minded to get himgone, as satisfied with the oblation of his kisses; would needs yetstep backe againe, saying. why should i not touch her yvory breast,the adamant that drew all desires to adore her? ah let me touch itnow, for never hereafter can i bee halfe so happy. overcome withthis alluring appetite, gently he laid his hand upon her breast,with the like awefull respect, as if she were living, and holding itso an indifferent while: either he felt, or his imagination soperswaded him, the heart of the lady to beate and pant. casting offall fond feare, and the warmth of his increasing the motion: hisinward soule assured him, that she was not dead utterly, but hadsome small sense of life remaining in her, whereof he would needs befurther informed.
so gently as possible he could, and with the helpe of his man, hetooke her forth of the monument, and layingher softly on his horsebefore him, conveighed her closely to his house in bologna. signiorgentile had a worthy lady to his mother, a woman of great wisdomeand vertue, who understanding by her sonne, how matters hadhappened, moved with compassion, and suffering no one in the houseto know what was done, made a good fire, and very excellent bathe,which recalled back againe wrongwandering life. then fetching avehement sigh, opening her eyes, and looking very strangly abouther, she said. alas! where am i now? whereto the good old ladykindly replyed, saying. comfort your selfe madame, for you are in agood place.
her spirits being in better manner met together, and she stillgazing every way about her, not knowing well where she was, and secingsignior gentile standing before her: he entreated his mother to tellher by what meanes she came thither; which the good old lady did,gentile himselfe helping to relate the whole history. a while shegrieved and lamented, but afterward gave them most hearty thankes,humbly requesting, that, in regard of the love he had formerly borneher, in his house she might finde no other usage, varying from thehonour of her selfe and her husband, and when day was come, to beconveighed home to her owne house. madame, answered signior gentile,whatsoever i sought to gaine from you in former dayes, i nevermeane, either here, or any where else, to motion any more. butseeing it hath been my happy fortune, to prove the blessed means ofreducing you from death to life: you shal find no otherentertainment here, then as if you were mine owne sister. and yetthe good deed which i have this night done for you doth welldeserve some courteous requitall: in which respect, i would have younot to deny me one favour, which i will presume to crave of you.whereto the lady lovingly replyed, that she was willing to grant it;provided, it were honest, and in her power: whereto signior gentilethus answered.
madame, your parents, kindred and friends, and generally allthroughout bologna, doe verily thinke you to be dead, whereforethere is not any one, that will make any inquisition after you: inwhich regard, the favour i desire from you, is no more but to abidehere secretly with my mother, untill such time as i returne frommodena, which shall be very speedily. the occasion why i move thismotion, aymeth at this end, that in presence of the chiefest personsof our city, i may make a gladsome present of you to your husband. thelady knowing her selfe highly beholding to the knight, and the requesthe made to be very honest: disposed her selfe to doe as he desired(although she earnestly longed, to glad her parents and kindred withseeing her alive) and made her promise him on her faith, to effectit in such manner, as he pleased to appoint and give her direction.
scarcely were these words concluded, but she felt the custome ofwomen to come upon her, with the paines and throwes incident tochilding: wherefore, with helpe of the aged lady, mother to signiorgentile, it was not long before her deliverance of a goodly sonne,which greatly augmented the joy of her and gentile, who tooke order,that all things belonging to a woman in such a case, were not wanting,but she was as carefully respected, even as if she had been his ownewife. secretly he repaired to modena, where having given direction forhis place of authority; he returned back againe to bologna, andthere made preparation for a great and solemne feast, appointing whoshould be his invited guests, the very chiefest persons in bologna,and (among them) signior nicoluccio caccianimico the especiall man.
after he was dismounted from horsebacke, and found so good companyattending for him (the lady also, more faire and healthful thenever, and the infant lively disposed) he sate downe at the tablewith his guests, causing them to be served in most magnificent manner,with plenty of all delicates that could be devised, and never beforewas there such a joviall feast. about the ending of dinner, closely hemade the lady acquainted with his further intention, and likewise inwhat order every thing should be done, which being effected, hereturned to his company, and used these speeches.
honourable friends, i remember a discourse sometime made unto me,concerning the countrey of persia, and a kind of custome thereobserved, not to be misliked in mine opinion. when any one intended tohonour his friend in effectuall manner, he invited him home to hishouse, and there would shew him the thing, which with greatest love hedid respect; were it wife, friend, sonne, daughter, or any thingelse whatsoever; wherewithall hee spared not to affirme, that as heshewed him those choyce delights, the like view he should have ofhis heart, if with any possibility it could be done; and the very samecustome i meane now to observe here in our city. you have vouchsafedto honour me with your presence, at this poore homely dinner ofmine, and i will welcome you after the persian manner, in shewingyou the jewell, which (above all things else in the world) i ever havemost respectively esteemed. but before i doe it, i crave yourfavourable opinions in a doubt, which i will plainely declare untoyou.
if any man having in his house a good and faithfull servant, whofalling into extremity of sickenesse, shall be throwne forth intothe open street, without any care or pitty taken on him: a strangerchanceth to passe by, and (moved with compassion of his weakenesse)carryeth him home to his owne house, where using all charitable andnot sparing any cost, he recovereth the sicke person to his formerhealth. i now desire to know, if keeping the said restored person, andimploying him about his owne businesse: the first master (bypretending his first right) may lawfully complaine of the second,and yeeld him backe againe to the first master, albeit he doe makechallenge of him?
all the gentlemen, after many opinions passing among them, agreedaltogether in one sentence, and gave charge to signior nicolucciocaccianimico, (because he was an excellent and elegant speaker) togive answere for them all. first, he commended the custome observed inpersia, saying, he jumpt in opinion with all the rest, that thefirst master had no right at all to the servant, having not onely(in such necessity) forsaken him, but also cast him forth into thecomfortlesse street. but for the benefits and mercy extended to him;it was more then manifest, that the recovered person, was becomejustly servant to the second master, and in detayning him from thefirst, hee did not offer him any injury at all. the whole companysitting at the table (being all very wise and worthy men) gave theirverdict likewise with the confession of signior nicolucciocaccianimico. which answere did not a little please the knight; and somuch the rather, because nicoluccio had pronounced it, affirminghimselfe to be of the same minde.
so, sitting in a pretended musing a while, at length he said. myhonourable guests, it is now more then high time, that i should doeyou such honour, as you have most justly deserved, by performing thepromise made unto you. then calling two of his servants, he sentthem to madame catharina (whom he had caused to adorne her self inexcellent manner) entreating her, that she would be pleased to gracehis guests with her presence. catharina, having deckt her child incostly habiliments, layed it in her armes, and came with theservants into the dyning hall, and sate down (as the knight hadappointed) at the upper end of the table, and then signior gentilespake thus. behold, worthy gentlemen, this is the jewell which ihave most affected, and intend to love none other in the world; be youmy judges, whether i have just occasion to doe so, or no? thegentlemen saluting her with respective reverence, said to theknight; that he had great reason to affect her: and viewing heradvisedly, many of them thought her to be the very same woman (asindeed she was) but that they beleeved her to be dead.
but above all the rest, nicoluccio caccianimico could never besatisfied with beholding her; and, enflamed with earnest desire, toknow what she was, could not refraine (seeing the knight was goneout of the roome) but demaunded of her, whether she were of bologna,or a stranger? when the lady heard her selfe to be thus questioned,and by her husband, it seemed painefull to her, to containe fromanswering: neverthelesse, to perfect the knights intended purpose, shesate silent. others demaunded of her, whether the sweet boy were hers,or no; and some questioned, if she were gentiles wife, or no, orelse his kinsewoman; to all which demaunds, she returned not anyanswere. but when the knight came to them againe, some of them said tohim. sir, this woman is a goodly creature, but she appeareth to bedumbe, which were great pitty, if it should be so. gentlemen (quothhe) it is no small argument of her vertue, to sit still and silentat this instant. tell us then (said they) of whence, and what sheis. therein (quoth he) i will quickely resolve you, upon yourconditionall promise: that none of you do remove from his place,whatsoever shall be said or done, untill i have fully delivered myminde. every one bound himselfe by solemne promise, to perform what hehad appointed, and the tables being voided, as also the carpetslaid; then the knight (sitting downe by the lady) thus began.
worthy gentlemen, this lady is that true and faithfull servant,wherof i moved the question to you, whom i tooke out of the coldstreet, where her parents, kindred and friends (making no account atall of her) threw her forth, as a thing vile and unprofitable.neverthelesse, such hath been my care and cost, that i have rescuedher out of deaths griping power; and, in a meere charitabledisposition, which honest affection caused me to beare her; of a body,full of terror and affrighting (as then she was) i have caused herto become thus lovely as you see. but because you may moreapparantly discerne, in what manner this occasion happened; i will layit open to you in more familiar manner. then he began the wholehistory, from the originall of his unbeseeming affection to her (inregard she was a worthy mans wife) and consequently, how all hadhappened to the instant houre, to the no meane admiration of all thehearers, adding withall. now gentlemen (quoth he) if you varry notfrom your former opinion, and especially signior nicolucciocaccianimico: this lady (by good right) is mine, and no man els by anyjust title, can lay any claime to her.
all sate silent, without answering one word, as expecting what heintended further to say: but in the meane while, nicoluccio, theparents and kindred, but chiefely the lady her selfe, appeared ashalfe melted into teares with weeping. but signior gentile, startingup from the table, taking the infant in his arme, and leading the ladyby the hand, going to nicoluccio, thus spake. rise sir, i will notgive thee thy wife, whom both her kindred and thine, threw forthinto the street: but i will bestow this lady on thee, being my gossip,and this sweet boy my god-sonne, who was (as i am verily perswaded)begotten by thee, i standing witnesse for him at the font of baptisme,and give him mine owne name gentile. let me entreat thee, that,although she hath lived here in mine house, for the space of threemonethes, she should not be lesse welcome to thee, then before: fori sweare to thee upon my soule, that my former affection to her (howunjust soever) was the onely meanes of preserving her life: and morehonestly she could not live, with father, mother, or thy selfe, thenshe hath done here with mine owne mother.
having thus spoken, he turned to the lady, saying. madame, i nowdischarge you of all promises made me, delivering you to yourhusband franke and free: and when he had given him the lady, and thechild in his armes, he returned to his place, and sate downe againe.nicoluccio, with no meane joy and hearty contentment received both hiswife and childe, being before farre from expectation of such anadmirable comfort; returning the knight infinite thankes (as all therest of the company pany the like) who could not refraine from weepingfor meere joy, for such a strange and wonderful accident: every onehighly commending gentile, and such also as chanced to hearethereof. the lady was welcommed home to her owne house, with manymoneths of joviall feasting, and as she passed through the streets,all beheld her with admiration, to be so happily recovered from hergrave signior gentile lived long after, a loyall friend tonicoluccio and his lady, and all that were well-willers to them.
what thinke you now ladies? can you imagine, because a king gaveaway his crowne and scepter; and an abbot (without any cost tohimselfe) reconciled a malefactor to the pope; and an oldidle-headed man, yeelding to the mercy of his enemy: that all thoseactions are comparable to this of signior gentile? youth and ardentaffection, gave him a just and lawfull title, to her who was free(by imagined death) from husband, parents, and all friends else, shebeing so happily wonne into his owne possession. yet honestly notonely overswayed the heate of desire, which in many men is violent andimmoderate: but with a bountifull and liberall soule, that which hecoveted beyond all hopes else, and had within his owne command; hefreely gave away. beleeve me (bright beauties) not any of the other(in a true and unpartiall judgement ) are worthy to be equalled withthis, or stiled by the name of magnificent actions.
the tenth day, the fift novell
admonishing all ladies and gentlewomen, that are desirous to
preserve their chastity, free from all blemish and taxation: to
make no promise of yeelding to any, under a compact or
covenant, how impossible soever it may seeme to be
madame dianora, the wife of signior gilberto, being immodestlyaffected by signior ansaldo, to free her selfe from his tediousimportunity, she appointed him to performe (in her judgement) an actof impossibility; namely, to give her a garden, as plentifullystored with fragrant flowers in january, as in the flourishingmoneth of may. ansaldo, by meanes of a bond which he made to amagitian, performed her request. signior gilberto, the ladyes husband,gave consent, that his wife should fulfill her promise made toansaldo. who hearing the bountifull mind of her husband; releasedher of her promise: and the magitian likewise discharged signioransaldo, without taking any thing of him.
not any one in all the company, but extolled the worthy act ofsignior gentile to the skies; till the king gave command to madameaemillia, that she should follow next with her tale, who boldlystepping up, began in this order.
gracious ladies, i thinke there is none heere present among us,but (with good reason) may maintaine, that signiour gentileperformed a magnificent deede; but whosoever saith, it is impossibleto do more; perhaps is ignorant in such actions, as can and may bedone, as i meane to make good unto you, by a novell not overlong ortedious.
the countrey of fretulium, better knowne by the name of forum julij;although it be subject to much cold, yet it is pleasant, in regardof many goodly mountaines, rivers, and cleare running springs,wherewith it is not meanly stored. within those territories, is a citycalled udina, where sometime lived a faire and noble lady, namedmadame dianora, wife to a rich and woorthie knight, called signiorgilberto, a man of very great fame and merite.
this beautiful lady, beeing very modest and vertuously inclined, washighly affected by a noble baron of those parts, tearmed by the nameof signior ansaldo gradense; a man of very great spirit, bountifull,active in armes, and yet very affable and courteous, which causedhim to be the better respected. his love to this lady wasextraordinary, hardly to bee contained within any moderate compasse,striving to bee in like manner affected of her: to which end, shewanted no daily solicitings, letters, ambassages and love-tokens,all proving to no purpose.
this vertuous lady, being wearied with his often temptations, andseeing, that by denying whatsoever he demanded, yet he wold not giveover his suite, but so much the more importunatly stil pursued her:began to bethinke her selfe, how she might best be rid of him, byimposing some such taske upon him, as should bee impossible (in heropinion) for him to effect. an olde woman, whom hee imployed for hiscontinual messenger to her, as shee came one day about her ordinaryerrand, with her she communed in this manner. good woman (quoth she)thou hast so often assured me, that signior ansaldo loveth me aboveall other women in the world, offering me wonderfull gifts andpresents in his name, which i have alwayes refused, and so stil wildo, in regard i am not to be woon by any such allurements: yet if icould be soundly perswaded, that his affection is answerable to thyperemptory protestations, i shoulde (perhaps) be the sooner wonne,to listen to his suite in milder manner, then hitherto i have done.wherefore, if he wil give me assurance, to perform such a businesse asi mean to enjoyne him, he shall the speedier heare better answerfrom me, and i wil confirme it with mine oath.
wonderfully pleased was mistresse maquerella, to heare a reply ofsuch comfortable hope; and therefore desired the lady, to tel hir whatshe wold have done. listen to me wel (answerd madam dianora) thematter which i would have him to effect for me, is; without the walsof our city, and during the month of januarie nexte ensuing, toprovide me a garden, as fairely furnished with all kind of fragrantflowers, as the flourishing month of may can yeelde no better. if hebe not able to accomplish this imposition, then i command him, neverhereafter to solicite me any more, either by thee, or any otherwhatsoever: for, if he do importune me afterward, as hitherto i haveconcealed his secret conspiring, both from my husband, and all myfriends; so wil i then lay his dishonest suite open to the world, thathe may receive punishment accordingly, for offering to wrong agentleman in his wife.
when signior ansaldo heard her demand, and the offer besidethereuppon made him (although it seemed no easie matter, but a thingmeerly impossible to be done) he considered advisedly, that she madethis motion to no other end, but onely to bereave him of all his hope,ever to enjoy what so earnestly hee desired: neverthelesse, he wouldnot so give it utterly over, but would needs approve what could bedone. heereupon, hee sent into divers partes of the world, to find outany one that was able to advise him in this doubtfull case. in theend, one was brought to him, who beeing well recompenced for hispaines, by the art of nigromancie would under take to do it. withhim signior ansaldo covenanted, binding himselfe to pay a greatsumme of mony, upon performance of so rare a deed, awaiting (inhopefull expectation) for the month of januaries comming. it beingcome, and the weather then in extreamity of cold, every beingcovered with ice and snow, the magitian prevailed so by his art,that after the christmas holy dayes were past, and the calends ofjanuary entred: in one night, and without the cittie wals, thegoodliest garden of flowers and fruites, was sodainely sprung up, as(in opinion of such as beheld it) never was the like seen before.now ladies, i think i need not demand the question, whether signioransaldo were wel pleased, or no, who going to beholde t, saw it mostplenteously stored, with al kind of fruit trees, flowers, herbes andplants, as no one could be named, that was wanting in this artificiallgarden. and having gathered some pretty store of them, secretly hesent them to madam dianora, inviting hir to come see her garden,perfected according to her owne desire, and uppon view thereof, toconfesse the integrity of his love to her; considering andremembring withall, the promise shee had made him under solemneoath, that she might be reputed for a woman of her word.
when the lady beheld the fruites and flowers, and heard many otherthinges recounted, so wonderfully growing in the same garden: began torepent her rash promise made; yet notwithstanding her repentance, aswomen are covetous to see all rarities; so, accompanied with diversladies and gentlewomen more, she went to see the garden; and havingcommended it with much admiration, she returned home againe, themost sorrowfull woman as ever lived, considering what she had tyed herselfe to, for enjoying this garden. so excessive grew her griefe andaffliction, that it could not be so clouded or concealed: but herhusband tooke notice of it, and would needs understand the occasionthereof. long the lady (in regard of shame and modesty) sate withoutreturning any answer; but being in the end constrained, she disclosdthe whol history to him.
at the first, signior gilberto waxed exceeding angry, but when hefurther considered withall, the pure and honest intention of his wife;wisely he pacified his former distemper, and saide. dianora, it is notthe part of a wise and honest woman, to lend an eare to ambassagesof such immodest nature, much lesse to compound or make agreementfor her honesty, with any person, under any condition whatsoever.those perswasions which the heart listeneth to, by allurement of theeare, have greater power then many do imagine, and nothing is souneasie or difficult, but in a lovers judgement it appeareth possible.ill didst thou therefore first of all to listen, but worse (afterward)to contract.
but, because i know the purity of thy soule, i wil yeelde (todisoblige thee of thy promise) as perhaps no wise man else would do:mooved thereto onely by feare of the magitian, who seeing signioransaldo displeased, because thou makest a mockage of him; will do somesuch violent wrong to us, as we shal be never able to recover.wherefore, i would have thee go to signior ansaldo, and if thoucanst (by any meanes) obtaine of him, the safe-keeping of thyhonour, and ful discharge of thy promise; it shal be an eternallfame to thee, and the crowne of a most victorious conquest. but ifit must needs be otherwise, lend him thy body onely for once, butnot thy wil: for actions committed by constraint, wherein the willis no way guilty, are halfe pardonable by the necessity.
madame dianora, hearing her husbands words, wept exceedingly, andavouched, that shee had not deserved any such especiall grace ofhim, and therefore she would rather dye, then doe it. neverthelesse,it was the wil of her husband to have it so, and therefore (againsther wil) she gave consent. the next morning, by the breake of day,dianora arose, and attiring her selfe in her very meanest garments,with two servingmen before her, and a waiting woman following, shewent to the lodging of signior ansaldo, who hearing that madam dianorawas come to visite him, greatly mervailed, and being risen, hecalled the magitian to him, saying. come go with me, and see whateffect will follow upon thine art. and being come into her presence,without any base or inordinate appetite, he did her humblereverence, embracing her honestly, and taking her into a goodlychamber, where a faire fire was readilie prepared, causing her tosit downe by him, he sayde unto her as followeth.
madam, i humbly intreat you to resolve me, if the affection i havelong time borne you, and yet do stil, deserve any recompence at all:you would be pleased then to tel me truly, the occasion of yourinstant comming hither, and thus attended as you are. dianora,blushing with modest shame, and the teares trickling mainly down herfaire cheekes, thus answered. signior ansaldo, not for any love ibeare you, or care of my faithfull promise made to you, but onely bythe command of my husband (who respecting more the paynes and trave ofyour inordinate love, then his owne reputation and honor, or mine;)hath caused me to come hither: and by vertue of his command, amready (for once onely) to fulfill your pleasure, but far from any willor consent in my selfe. if signior ansaldo were abashed at thefirst, hee began now to be more confounded with admiration, when heheard the lady speake in such strange manner: and being much movedwith the liberall command of her husband, he began to alter hisinflamed heate, into most honourable respect and compassion, returningher this answer.
most noble lady, the gods forbid (if it be so as you have sayd) thati should (villain-like) soile the honour of him, that takes suchunusuall compassion of my unchaste appetite. and therefore, you mayremaine heere so long as you please, in no other condition, but asmine owne naturall borne sister; and likewise, you may depart freelywhen you will: conditionally, that (on my behalfe) you render suchthankes to your husband, as you thinke convenient for his great bountytowards me, accounting me for ever heereafter, as his loyall brotherand faithfull servant. dianora having well observed his answer, herheart being ready to mount out at her mouth with joy, said. all theworld could never make mee beleeve (considering your honourableminde and honesty) that it would happen otherwise to me, then now ithath done, for which noble courtesie, i will continually remaineobliged to you. so, taking her leave, she returned home honorablyattended to her husband, and relating to him what had happened, itproved the occasion of begetting intire love and friendship,betweene himselfe and the noble lord ansaldo.
now concerning the skilfull magitian, to whom ansaldo meant togive the bountifull recompence agreed on betweene them, hee havingseene the strange liberality, which the husband expressed to signioransaldo, and that of ansaldo to the lady, hee presently saide. greatjupiter strike me dead with thunder, having my selfe seene a husbandso liberall of his honour, and you sir of true noble kindnesse, if ishould not be the like of my recompence: for, perceiving it to be soworthily imployed, i am well contented that you shal keepe it. thenoble lord was modestly ashamed, and strove (so much as in him lay)that he should take all, or the greater part thereof: but seeing helaboured meerly in vaine, after the third day was past, and themagitian had destroyed the garden againe, hee gave him free liberty todepart, quite controlling all fond and unchaste affection in himselfe,either towards dianora, or any lady else, and living (ever after) asbest becommeth any nobleman to do.
what say you now ladies? shal wee make any account of the womanwel-neere dead, and the kindnesse growne cold in signiour gentile,by losse of his former hopes, comparing them with the liberality ofsignior ansaldo, affecting more fervently, then ever the other did?and being (beyond hope) possessed of the booty, which (above allthings else in the world) he most desired to have, to part with itmeerly in fond compassion? i protest (in my judgement) the one is noway comparable to the other; that of geitile, with this last ofsignior ansaldo.
the tenth day, the sixt novell
sufficiently declaring, that how mighty soever the power of
love is: yet a magnanimous and truly generous heart, it can
by no meanes fully conquer
victioious king chrles, sirnamed the aged, and first of that name,fell in love with a yong maiden, named genevera, daughter to anancient knight, called signior neri degli uberti. and waxing ashamedof his amorous folly, caused both genevera, and her fayre sisterisotta, to be joyned in marriage with two noble gentlemen; the onenamed signior maffeo da palizzi, and the other, signior gulielmo dellamagna.
who is able to expresse ingeniously, the diversity of opinions,which hapned among the ladies, in censuring on the act of madamedianora, and which of them was most liberall, eithet signiorgilberto the husband, lord ansaldo the importunate suiter, or themagitian, expecting to bee bountifully rewarded. surely, it is amatter beyond my capacity: but after the king had permitted theirdisputation a long while, looking on madam fiammetta, he commandedthat she should report her novel to make an end of their controversie;and she (without any further delaying) thus began. i did alwaies(noble ladies) hold it fit and decent, that in such an assembly asthis of ours is, every one ought to speake so succinctly andplainly: that the obscure understanding, concerning the matters spokenof, should have no cause of disputation. for disputes do much betterbecome the colledges of schollers, then to be among us, who hardly canmanage our distaves or samplers. and therefore i, who intend to relatesomething, which (peradventure) might appeare doubtfull: will forbeare(seeing you in such a difference; for that which hath bin spokenalreadie) to use any difficult discourse; but will speake of one, aman of no meane ranke or quality, being both a valiant and vertuousking, and what he did, without any impeach or blemish to his honor.
i make no doubt, but you have often heard report, of king charls theaged, and first of that name, by reason of his magnificententerprises, as also his most glorious victory, which he obtaindagainst king manfred, when the ghibellines were expulsed foorth offlorence, and the guelphes returned thither againe. by which occasion,an ancient knight, named signior neri degli uberti; forsaking then thecity, with all his family and great store of wealth, woulde live underany other obedience, then the awful power or command of kingcharles. and coveting to be in some solitary place, where he mightfinish the remainder of his dayes in peace, he went to castello damare; where, about a bow shoote distance from all other dwellinghouses, hee bought a parcel of ground, plentifully stored with varietyof trees, bearing olives, chesnuts, orenges, lemons, pomcitrons, andother excellent frutages, wherewith the countrey flourishethabundantly. there he built a very faire and commodious house, andplanted (close by it) a pleasant garden, in the middst whereof,because he had great plenty of water: according as other men use todo, being in the like case so wel provided; he made a very goodlypond, which forthwith had all kinde of fish swimming in it, it beinghis daily care and endevour, to tend his garden, and encrease hisfish-pond.
it fortuned, that king charles in the summer time) for hispleasure and recreation, went to repose himselfe (for some certaynedayes) at castello de mare, where having heard report of the beautieand singularitie of signiour neries garden; hee grew very desirousto see it. but when he understoode to whome it belonged, then heentred into consideration with himselfe, that hee was an ancientknight, maintaining a contrarie faction to his: wherefore, hethought it fit to goe in some familiar manner, and with no trayneattending on him. wherupon he sent him word, that he wold come tovisit him, with foure gentlemen onely in his companie, meaning tosup with him in his garden the next night ensuing. the newes wasvery welcome to signior neri, who took order in costly maner for allthings to bee done, entertaining the king most joyfully into hisbeautifull garden.
when the king had survayed all, and the house likewise, he commendedit beyond all other comparison, and the tables being placed by theponds side, he washed his hands therin, and then sat down at the thecount, sir guy de montforte (who was one of them which came in hiscompany) to sitte downe by him, and signior neri on his other side. asfor the other three of the traine, hee commaunded them to attend onhis service, as signior neri had given order. there wanted noexquisite viandes and excellent wines, all performed in most decentmanner, and without the least noise or disturbance, wherein the kingtooke no little delight.
feeding thus in this contented manner, and fancying the solitudeof the place: sodainly entred into the garden, two yong damosels, eachaged about some fifteene yeares, their haire resembling wyars of gold,and curiously curled, having chaplets (made like provinciallcrownes) on their heades, and their delicate faces, expressing them tobe rather angels, then mortall creatures, such was the appearance oftheir admired beauty. their under-garments were of costly silke, yetwhite as the finest snow, framed (from the girdle upward) close totheir bodies, but spreading largely downward, like the extendure ofa pavillion, and so descending to the feet. she that first came insight, caried on her shoulder a couple of fishing netts, which sheheld fast with her left hand, and in the right she carryed a longstaffe. the other following her, had on her left shoulder afrying-pan, and under the same arme a small faggot of woodde, with atrevit in her hand; and in the other hand a pot of oyle, as also abrand of fire flaming.
no sooner did the king behold them, but he greatly wondered whatthey should be; and, without uttering one word, attended to listenwhat they wold say. both the yong damosels, when they were come beforethe king, with modest and bashfull gesture, they performed very humblereverence to him, and going to the place of entrance into the pond,she who held the trevit, set it downe on the ground, with the otherthings also; and taking the staffe which the other damosell carried:they both went into the pond, the water whereof reached so high asto their bosomes. one of the servants to signior neri, presentlykindled the fire, setting the trevit over it, and putting oyle intothe frying-panne, held it uppon the trevit, awaiting untill thedamosels should cast him uppe fish. one of them did beate a place withthe staffe, where she was assured of the fishes resort, and theother hadde lodged the nets so conveniently, as they quickly caughtgreat store of fish, to the kings high contentment, who observed theirbehaviour very respectively.
as the fishes were throwne up to the servant, alive as they were, hetooke the best and fairest of them, and brought them to the table,where they skipt and mounted before the king, count guy de montfortand the father: some leaping from the table into the pond againe,and others, the king (in a pleasing humour) voluntarily threw backe tothe damosels. jesting and sporting in this manner, till the servanthad drest divers of them in exquisite order, and served them to thetable according as signior neri had ordained. when the damosels sawthe fishes service performed, and perceived that they had fishedsufficiently: they came forth of the water, their garments then (beingwet) hanging close about them, even as if they hid no part of theirbodies. each having taken those things againe, which at first theybrought with them, and saluting the king in like humility as theydid before, returned home to the mansion house.
the king and count likewise, as also the other attendinggentlemen, having duely considered the behavior of the damosels:commended extraordinarily their beauty and faire feature, with thoseother perfections of nature so gloriously shining in them. but (beyondall the rest) the king was boundlesse in his praises given of them,having observed their going into the water, the equall carriagethere of them both, their comming forth, and gracious demeanor attheir departing (yet neither knowing of whence, or what they were)he felt his affection very violently flamed, and grew into such anamourous desire to them both, not knowing which of them pleased himmost, they so choisely resembled one another in all things.
but after he had dwelt long enough upon these thoughts, he turnedhim selfe to signior neri, and demanded of him, what damosels theywere. sir (answered neri) they are my daughters, both brought into theworld at one birth, and twinnes, the one being named genevera thefaire, and the other isotta the amiable. the king began againe tocommend them both, and gave him advise to get them both married:wherein he excused himselfe, alleadging, that he wanted power to doeit. at the same time instant, no other service remaining to be broughtto the table, except fruit and cheese, the two damosels returnedagaine, attyred in goodly roabes of carnation sattin, formed after theturkish fashion, carrying two fayre silver dishes in their hands,filled with divers delicate fruites, such as the season then afforded,setting them on the table before the king. which being done, theyretyred a little backeward, and with sweet melodious voyces, sung aditty, beginning in this manner.
where love presumeth into place:
let no one sing in loves disgrace.
so sweet and pleasing seemed the song to the king (who tooke nosmall delight, both to heare and behold the damosels) even as if allthe hirarchies of angels were descended from the heavens to singbefore him. no sooner was the song ended, but (humbly on theirknees) they craved favour of the king for their departing. now,although their departure was greatly grieving to him, yet (inoutward appearance) he seemed willing to grant it.
when supper was concluded, and the king and his company remounted onhorsebacke: thankefully departing from signior neri, the king returnedto his lodging, concealing there closely his affection to himselfe,and whatsoever important affaires happened: yet he could not forgetthe beauty, and gracious behaviour of genevera the faire (for whosesake he loved her sister likewise) but became so linked to her invehement maner, as he had no power to think on any thing else.pretending other urgent occasions, he fell into great familiarity withsignior neri, visiting very often his goodly garden; onely to seehis faire daughter genevera, the adamant which drew him thither.
when he felt his amourous assaults, to exceed all power of longersufferance: he resolved determinately with himselfe, (being unprovidedof any better meanes) to take her away from her father, and notonely she, but her sister also; discovering both his love and intentto count guy de montforte, who being a very worthy and vertuouslord, and meet to be a counseller for a king, delivered his mind inthis manner.
gracious lord, i wonder not a little at your speeches, and so muchthe greater is my admiration, because no man els can be subject to thelike, in regard i have knowne you from the time of your infancy;even to this instant houre, and alwayes your carriage to bee one andthe same. i could never perceive in your youthfull dayes (when loveshould have the greatest meanes to assaile you) any such oppressingpassions: which is now the more novell and strange to me, to heareit but said, that you being old, and called the aged; should be growneamorous, surely to me it seemeth a miracle. and if it appertained tome to reprehend you in this case, i know well enough what i could say.considering, you have yet your armour on your backe, in a kingdomenewly conquered, among a nation not knowne to you, full of falsehoods,breaches, and treasons; all which are no meane motives to care andneedfull respect. but having now wone a little leisure, to rest yourselfe a while from such serious affaires; can you give way to the idlesuggestions of love? beleeve me sir, it is no act becomming amagnanimious king; but rather the giddy folly of a young braine.
moreover you say (which most of all i mislike) that you intend totake the two virgines from the knight, who hath given youentertainment in his house beyond his ability, and to testifie howmuch he honoured you, he suffered you to have a sight of them, meerely(almost) in a naked manner: witnessing thereby, what constant faith hereposed in you, beleeving verily, that you were a just king, and not aravenous woolfe. have you so soone forgot, that the rapes andviolent actions, done by king manfred to harmelesse ladies, madeyour onely way of entrance into this kingdome? what treason was evercommitted, more worthy of eternall punishment, then this will be inyou: to take away from him (who hath so highly honoured you) hischiefest hope and consolation? what will be said by all men, if youdoe it?
peradventure you thinke, it will be a sufficient excuse for you,to say: i did it, in regard hee was a ghibelline. can you imagine thisto be justice in a king, that such as get into their possession inthis manner (whatsoever it be) ought to use it in this sort? let metell you sir, it was a most worthy victory for you, to conquer kingmanfred: but it is farre more famous victory, for a man to conquerhimselfe. you therfore, who are ordained to correct vices in othermen, learne first to subdue them in your selfe, and (by brideling thisinordinate appetite) set not a foule blemish on so faire a fame, aswill be honour to you to preserve spotlesse.
these words pierced the heart of the king deepely, and so much themore afflicted him, because he knew them to be most true: wherefore,after he had ventred a very vehement sigh, thus he replyed. beleeve menoble count, there is not any enemy, how strong soever he be, but ihold him weake and easie to be vanquished, by him who is skilfull inthe warre, where a man may learne to conquere his owne appetite. butbecause he shall find it a laborious taske, requiring inestimablestrength and courage; your words have so toucht me to the quicke, thatit becommeth me to let you effectually perceive (and within thecompasse of few dayes) that as i have learned to conquer others, soi am not ignorant, in expressing the like power upon my selfe.having thus spoken, within some few dayes after, the king beingreturned to naples, he determined, as we to free himself from anythe like ensuing follie, as also to recompence signior neri, for thegreat kindnesse he had shewne to him (although it was a difficultthing, to let another enjoy, what he rather desired for himselfe) tohave the two damosels married, not as the daughters of signior neri,but even as if they were his owne. and by consent of the father, hegave genevera the faire, to signior maffeo da palizzi, and isottathe amiable, to signior gulielmo della magna, two noble knights andhonourable barons. after he had thus given them in marriage, in sadmourning he departed thence into apuglia, where by following worthyand honourable actions, he so well overcame all inordinateappetites: that shaking off the enthraling fetters of love, he livedfree from all passions, the rest of his life time, and dyed as anhonourable king.
some perhaps will say, it was a small matter for a king, to giveaway two damosels in marriage, and i confesse it: but i maintaine itto be great, and more then great, if we say, that a king, being soearnestly enamoured as this king was; should give her away to another,whom he so dearely affected himselfe, without receiving (in recompenceof his affection) so much as a leaffe, flowre, or the least fruit oflove. yet such was the vertue of this magnificent king, expressed inso highly recompencing the noble knights courtesie, honouring thetwo daughters so royally, and conquering his owne affections sovertuously.
the tenth day, the seventh novell
wherein is covertly given to understand, that howsoever a prince
may make use of his absolute power and authority, towards maides
or wives that are his subjects: yet he ought to deny and reject
all things, as shall make him forgetfull
of himselfe, and his true honour
lisana, the daughter of a florentine apothecary, named bernardopuccino, being at palermo, and seeing piero, king of aragon run at thetilt; fell so affectionately enamored of him, that she languished inan extreame and long sickenesse. by her owne devise, and means of asong, sung in the hearing of the king: he vouchsafed to visite her,and giving her a kisse, terming himselfe also to bee her knight forever after, hee honourably bestowed her in marriage on a younggentleman, who was called perdicano, and gave him liberallendowments with her.
madame fiametta being come to the end of her novell, and the greatmagnificence of king charles much commended (howbeit, some of thecompany, affecting the ghibelline faction, were otherwise minded)madame pampinea, by order given from the king, began in this manner.
there is no man of good understanding (honourable ladies) but willmaintaine what you have said of victorious charles; except such ascannot wish well to any. but because my memory hath instantly informedme, of an action (perhaps) no lesse commendable then this, done byan enemy of the said king charles, and to a yong maiden of our city, iam the more willing to relate it, upon your gentle attentionvouchsafed, as hitherto it hath been courteously granted.
at such time as the french were driven out of sicilie, there dweltat palermo a florentine apothecary, named bernardo puccino, a man ofgood wealth and reputation, who had by his wife one onely daughter, ofmarriageable yeares, and very beautifull. piero, king of arragon,being then become lord of that kingdom, he made an admirable feastroyall at palermo, accompanyed with his lords and barons. in honour ofwhich publique feast, the king kept a triumphall day (of justs andturnament) at catalana, and whereat it chanced, that the daughter ofbernardo, named lisana, was present. being in a window, accompaniedwith other gentlewomen, she saw the king runne at the tilt, who seemedso goodly a person in her eye; that being never satisfied withbeholding him, she grew enamoured, and fell into extremity ofaffection towards him.
when the feastivall was ended, she dwelling in the house of herfather, it was impossible for her to thinke on any thing else, butonely the love, which she had fixed on a person of such height. andthat which most tormented her in this case, was the knowledge of herowne condition, being but meane and humble in degree; whereby sheconfessed, that she could not hope for any successefull issue of herproud love. neverthelesse, she would not refraine from affecting theking, who taking no note of this kindnesse in her, by anyperceivable meanes; must needs be the more regardles, which procured(by wary observation) her afflictions to be the greater andintollerable.
whereon it came to passe, that this earnest love encreasing in hermore and more, and one melancholly conceit taking hold on another: thefaire maide, when she could beare the burden of her griefe nolonger; fell into a languishing sickenesse, consuming away daily (byevident appearance) even as the snow melteth by the warme beames ofthe sunne.
the father and mother, much dismayed and displeased at this haplesseaccident, applying her with continuall comforts, phisicke, and thebest skill remayning in all the phisitions, sought all possible meaneswayes to give her succour: but all proved to no effect, because inregard of her choyce (which could sort to none other then adesperate end) she was desirous to live no longer. now it fortuned,that her parents offering her whatsoever remained in their power toperforme, a sudden apprehension entred her minde, to wit, that (ifit might possible be done) before she dyed, she would first have theking to know, in what manner she stood affected to him. wherefore, oneday she entreated her father that a gentleman, named manutio dearezza, might be permitted to come see her. this manutio was (in thosetimes) held to be a most excellent musitian, both for his voyce insinging, and exquisite skill in playing on instruments, for which hewas highly in favour with king piero, who made (almost) daily use ofhim, to heare him both sing and play.
her tender and loving father conceived immediately, that shee wasdesirous to heare his playing and singing, both being comfortable to abody in a languishing. sickenesse, whereupon, he sent presently forthe gentleman, who came accordingly, and after he had comforted lisanawith kind and courteous speeches; he played dexteriously on hislute, which purposely hee had brought with him, and likewise he sungdivers excellent ditties, which insted of his intended consolationto the maid, did nothing else but encrease her fire and flame.
afterward, she requested to have some conference with manutio alone,and every one being gone forth of the chamber, she spake unto him inthis manner.
manutio, i have made choyce of thee, to be the faithfull guardian ofan especial secret, hoping first of al, that thou wilt never revealeit to any living body, but onely to him whom i shall bid thee: andnext, to helpe me so much as possibly thou canst, because my onelyhope relyeth in thee. know then my dearest friend manutio, that on thesolemne festivall day, when our soveraigne lord the king honouredhis exaltation, with the noble exercises of tilt and turney; his bravebehaviour kindled such a sparke in my soule, as since brake forth intoa violent flame, and brought me to this weake condition as now thouseest. but knowing and confessing, how farre unbeseeming my love is,to aime so ambitiously at a king, and being unable to controule it, orin the least manner to diminish it: i have made choyce of the onelyand best remedy of all, namely, to dye, and so i am most willing todoe.
true it is, that i shall travaile in this my latest journey, withendlesse torment and affliction of soule, except he have someunderstanding thereof before, and not knowing by whom to give himintelligence, in so oft and convenient order, as by thee: i doetherefore commit this last office of a friend to thy trust, desiringthee, not to refuse me in the performance thereof. and when thouhast done it, to let me understand what he saith, that i may dye themore contentedly, and disburdened of so heavy an oppression, the onelycomfort to a parting spirit: and so she ceased, her teares flowingforth abundantly.
manutio did not a little wonder at the maides great spirit, andher desperate resolution, which moved him to exceedingcommiseration, and suddenly he conceived, that honestly he mightdischarge this duty for her, whereupon, he returned her this answer.lisana, here i engage my faith to thee, that thou shalt find mefirme and constant, and die i will, rather then deceive thee.greatly i doe commend thy high attempt, in fixing thy affection onso potent a king, wherein i offer thee my utmost assistance: and imake no doubt (if thou wouldest be of good comfort) to deale in suchsort, as, before three dayes are fully past, to bring such newes aswill content thee, and because i am loath to loose the least time, iwill goe about it presently. lisana the yong maiden, once againeentreated his care and diligence, promising to comfort her selfe sowell as she could, commending him to his good fortune. when manutiowas gone from her, hee went to a gentleman, named mico de sienna,one of the best poets in the composing of verses, as all those partsyeelded not the like. at his request, mico made for him this ensuingdittie.
the song
sung in the hearing of king piero, on the
behalfe of love-sicke lisana
goe love, and tell the torments i endure,
say to my soveraigne lord, that i must die
except he come, some comfort to procure,
for tell i may not, what i feele, and why.
with heaved hands great love, i call to thee,
goe see my soveraigne, where he doth abide,
and say to him, in what extremity,
thou hast (for him) my firm affection tryed.
to die for him, it is my sole desire,
for live with him i may not, nor aspire,
to have my fortunes thereby dignified,
onely his sight would lend me life a while:
grant it (great love) mine anguish to beguile.
goe love, and tell the torments, etc.
since the first houre that love enthralled me,
i never had the heart, to tell my griefe,
my thoughts did speake, for thoughts be alwayes free,
yet hopefull thoughts doe find but poore reliefe.
when gnats will mount to eagles in the ayre,
alas! they scorne them, for full well they know,
they were not bred to prey so base and low,
aloft they look, to make their flight more faire.
and yet his sight would lend me life a while:
grant it (great love) mine anguish to beguile.
goe love, and tell the torments, etc.
if sight shall be denyed, then tell them plaine,
his high triumphall day procurd my death,
the launce that won him honour, hath me slaine,
for instantly it did bereave my breath.
that speake i could not, nor durst be so bold,
to make the ayre acquainted with my woe:
alas! i lookt so high, and doing so,
justly deserve by death to be controld.
yet mercies sight would lend me life a while,
grant it (great love) mine anguish to beguffe.
goe love, and tell the torments i endure,
say to my soveraigne lord, that i must die:
except he come, some comfort to procure,
for tell i may not, what i feele, and why.
the lines contained in this ditty, manutio fitted with noates somooving and singularly musicall, that every word had the seisiblemotion of life in it, where the king being (as yet) not risen from thetable, he commanded him to use both his lute and voyce.
this seemed a happy opportunity to manutio, to sing the dittie sopurposely done and devised: which hee delivered in such excellentmanner, the voice and instrument concording so extraordinary pleasing;that all the persons then in the presence, seemed rather statues, thenliving men, so strangely they were wrapt with admiration, and the kinghimselfe farre beyond all the rest, transported with a rare kinde ofalteration.
when manutio had ended the song, the king demanded of him, whencethis song came, because he had never heard it before? my graciouslord, answered manutio, it must needes seeme straunge to your majesty,because it is not fully three dayes, since it was invented, made,and set to the note. then the king asked, whom it concerned? sir(quoth manutio) i dare not disclose that to any but onely yourselfe. which answer made the king much more desirous, and beingrisen from the table, he tooke him into his bedchamber, wheremanutio related all at large to him, according to the trust reposed inhim. wherwith the king was wonderfully well pleased, greatlycommending the courage of the maide, and said, that a virgin of such avaliant spirit, did well deserve to have her case commiserated: andcommanded him also, to goe (as sent from him) and comfort her, withpromise, that the very same day, in the evening, he would not faile tocome and see her.
manutio, more then contented, to carry such glad tydings tolisana; without staying in any place, and taking his lute also withhim, went to the apothecaries house, where speaking alone with themaide: he told her what he had done, and afterward sung the song toher, in as excellent manner as he had done before, wherein lisanaconceived such joy and contentment, as even in the very same moment,it was observed by apparant signes, that the violence of her fitsforsooke her, and health began to get the upper hand of them. so,without suffering any one in the house to know it, or by the leastmeanes to suspect it; she comforted her selfe till the evening, inexpectation of her soveraignes arrivall.
piero being a prince, of most liberall and benigne nature, havingafterward divers times considered on the matters which manutio hadrevealed to him, knowing also the yong maiden, to bee bothbeautifull and vertuous: was so much moved with pitty of herextremitie, as mounting on horsebacke in the evening, and seeming asif he rode abroad for his private recreation; he went directly tothe apothecaries house, where desiring to see a goodly garden,appertaining then to the apothecarie, he dismounted from his horse.walking into the garden, he began to question with bernardo,demaunding him for his daughter, and whether he had (as yet) marryedher, or no? my gracious lord, answered bernardo, as yet shee is notmarryed, neither likely to bee, in regard shee hath had a long andtedious sickenesse: but since dinner time, she is indifferentlyeased of her former violent paine, which we could not discerne thelike alteration in her, a long while before.
the king understood immediately, the reason of this so suddenalteration, and said. in good faith bernardo, the world would sustainea great maine and imperfection, by the losse of thy faire daughter;wherefore, we will goe our selfe in person to visite her. so, with twoof his lords onely, and the father, he ascended to the maideschamber and being entred, he went to the beds side, where she sate,somewhat raised, in expectation of his comming, and taking her bythe hand, he said. faire lisana, how commeth this to passe? youbeing so faire a virgin, yong, and in the delicacy of your daies,which should be the chiefest comfort to you, will you suffer yourselfe to be over-awed with sickenesse? let us intreat you, that (forour sake) you will be of good comfort, and thereby recover your healththe sooner, especially, when it is requested by a king, who is sorryto see so bright a beauty sicke, and would helpe it, it consisted inhis power.
lisana, feeling the touch of his hand, whom she loved above allthings else in the world, although a bashfull blush mounted up intoher cheekes: yet her heart was seazed with such a rapture of pleasure,that she thought her selfe translated into paradise, and, so well asshe could, thus she replyed. great king, by opposing my feeblestrength, against a burden of over-ponderous weight, it became theoccasion of this grievous sickenesse: but i hope that the violencethereof is (almost) already kild, onely by this soveraigne mercy inyou, and doubtlesse it will cause my speedy deliverance. the kingdid best understand this so well palliated answere of lisana, which ashe did much commend, in regard of her high adventuring; so he didagaine as greatly condemne fortune, for not making her more happy inher birth.
so, after he had stayed there a good while, and given her manycomfortable speeches, he returned backe to the court. this humanity inthe king, was reputed a great honour to the apothecary and hisdaughter, who (in her owne mind) received as much joy andcontentment thereby, as ever any wife could have of her owne husband.
and being assisted by better hopes, within a short while after,she became recovered, and farre more beautifull (in common judgment)then ever she was before.
lisana being now in perfect health, the king consulted with hisqueene, what meete recompence he should gratifie her withall, forloving and affecting him in such fervent manner. upon a daydetermined, the king mounting on horsebacke, accompanied with manyof his cheefest lords and barons, he rode to the apothecaries house,where walking in his beautifull garden, hee called for bernardo andhis daughter lisana. in the meane space, the queene also came thither,royally attended on by her ladies, and lisana being admitted intotheir company, they expressed themselves very gracious to her. sooneafter, the king and the queene cald lisana, and the king spake in thismanner to her.
faire virgin, the extraordinary love which you bare to us, callethfor as great honour from us to you; in which respect, it is our royalldesire, by one meanes or other to requite your kinde love. in ouropinion, the chief honour we can extend to you. is, that being ofsufficient yeares for marriage, you would grace us so much, as toaccept him for your husband, whom we intend to bestow on you. besidethis further grant from us, that (notwithstanding whatsoever else) youshall call us your knight; without coveting any thing else from you,for so great favour, but only one kisse, and thinke not to bestow itnicely on a king, but grant it the rather, because he begges it.
lisana, whose lookes were dyed with a vermillian tincture, or ratherconverted into a pure maiden blush, reputing the kings desire to beher owne; in a low and humbled voyce, thus answered. my lord, mostcertaine am i, that if it had beene publikely knowne, how none butyour highnes, might serve for me to fixe my love on, i should havebeen termed the foole of all fooles: they perhaps beleeving, that iwas forgetfull of my selfe, in being ignorant of mine ownecondition, and much lesse of yours. but the gods are my witnesses(because they know the secrets of all hearts) that even in the veryinstant, when loves fire tooke hold on my yeelding affection: i knewyou to be a king, and my selfe the daughter of poore bernardo theapothecary: likewise, how farre unfitting it was for me, to be soambitious in my loves presuming. but i am sure your majestie doth know(much better then i am able to expresse) that no one becommethamourous, according to the duty of election, but as the appetiteshapeth his course, against whose lawes my strength made manyresistances, which not prevailing, i presumed to love, did, and so forever shall doe, your majestie.
now royall soveraigne, i must needes confesse, that so soone as ifelt my selfe thus wholly conquered by loving you, i resolved for everafter, to make your will mine owne, and therefore, am not onelywilling to accept him for my husband, whom you shall please toappoint, befitting my honor and degree: but if you will have me tolive in a flaming fire, my obedience shall sacrifice it selfe toyour will, with the absolute conformity of mine owne. to stile youby the name of my knight, whom i know to be my lawfull king andsoveraigne; you are not ignorant, how farre unfitting a word that werefor me to use: as also the kisse which you request, in requitall of mylove to you; to these two i will never give consent, without thequeenes most gracious favour and license first granted. neverthelesse,for such admirable benignity used to me, both by your royall selfe,and your vertuous queene: heaven shower downe all boundlesse graces onyou both, for it exceedeth all merit in me, and so she ceasedspeaking, in most dutifull manner.
the answer of lisana pleased the queene exceedingly, in findingher to be so wise and faire, as the king himself had before informedher: who instantly called for her father and mother, and knowingthey would be well pleased with whatsoever he did; he called for aproper yong gentleman, but somewhat poore, being named perdicano,and putting certaine rings into his hand, which he refused not toreceive, caused him there to espouse lisana. to whome the king gaveimmediately (besides chaines and jewels of inestimable valew,delivered by the queene to the bride) ceffala and calatabelotta, twogreat territories abounding in divers wealthy possessions, saying toperdicano. these wee give thee, as a dowry in marriage with thisbeautifull maid, and greater gifts we will bestow on thee hereafter,as we shal perceive thy love and kindnesse to her.
when he had ended these words, hee turned to lisana, saying: heeredoe i freely give over all further fruits of your affection towardsme, thanking you for your former love: so taking her head betweene hishands he kissed her faire forhead, which was the usuall custome inthose times. perdicano, the father and mother of lisana, and she herselfe likewise, extraordinarily joyfull for this so fortunate amarriage, returned humble and hearty thankes both to the king andqueene, and (as many credible authors doe affirme) the king kept hispromise made to lisana, because (so long as he lived) he alwalestermed himselfe by the name of her knight, and in al actions ofchivalry by him undertaken, he never carried any other devise, butsuch as he received still from her.
by this, and divers other like worthy deeds, not onely did he winthe hearts of his subjects; but gave occasion to the who world beside,to renowne his fame to all succeeding posterity. whereto (in thesemore wretched times of ours) few or none bend the sway of theirunderstanding: but rather how to bee cruell and tyrranous lords, andthereby win the hatred of their people.
the tenth day, the eight novell
declaring, that notwithstanding the frownes of fortune,
diversity of occurrences, and contrary accidents happening:
yet love and friendship ought to be preciously preserved
among men
sophronia, thinking her selfe to be the maried wife of gisippus, was(indeed) the wife of titus quintus fulvius, and departed thence withhim to rome. within a while after, gisippus also came thither invery poore condition, and thinking that he was despised by titus, grewweary of his life, and confessed that he had murdred a man, with fulintent to die for the fact. but titus taking knowledge of him, anddesiring to save the life of gisippus, charged himself to have donethe bloody deed. which the murderer himself (standing then among themultitude) seeing, truly confessed the deed. by meanes whereof, allthree were delivered by the emperor octavius; and titus gave hissister in mariage to gisippus, giving them also the most part of hisgoods and inheritances.
by this time madam philomena, at command of the king, (madampampinea ceasing) prepared to follow next in order, whereupon thus shebegan. what is it (gracious ladies) that kings cannot do (if theylist) in matters of greatest importance, and especially unto such asmost they should declare their magnificence? he then that performethwhat he ought to do, when it is within his owne power, doth well.but it is not so much to bee admired, neither deserveth halfe thecommendations, as when one man doth good to another, when least itis expected, as being out of his power, and yet performed. in whichrespect, because you have so extolled king piero, as appearing notmeanly meritorious in your judgements; i make no doubt but you will bemuch more pleased, when the actions of our equals are duly considered,and shal paralell any of the greatest kings. wherefore i purpose totell you a novel, concerning an honorable curtesie of two worthyfriends.
at such time as octavius caesar (not as yet named augustus, but onlyin the office called triumveri) governed the romane empire, theredwelt in rome a gentleman, named publius quintus fulvius, a man ofsingular understanding, who having one son, called titus quintusfulvius, of towardly yeares and apprehension, sent him to athens tolearne philosophy, but with letters of familiar commendations, to anoble athenian gentleman, named chremes, being his ancient friend, oflong acquaintance. this gentleman lodged titus in his owne house, ascompanion to his son, named gisippus, both of them studyingtogether, under the tutoring of a philosopher, called aristippus.these two yong gentlemen living thus in one citty, house, and schoole,it bred betweene them such a brother-hoode and amity, as they couldnot be severed from one another, but only by the accident of death;nor could either of them enjoy any content, but when they were bothtogether in company.
being each of them endued with gentle spirits, and having beguntheir studies together: they arose (by degrees) to the glorious heightof philosophy, to their much admired fame and commendation. in thismanner they lived, to the no meane comfort of chremes, hardlydistinguishing the one from the other for his son, and thus theschollers continued the space of three yeares. at the ending wherof(as it hapneth in al things else) chremes died, whereat both the younggentlemen conceived such hearty griefe, as if he had bin theircommon father; nor could the kinred of chremes discerne, which ofthe two had most need of comfort, the losse touched them so equally.
it chanced within some few months after, that the kinred of gisippuscame to see him, and (before titus) avised him to marriage, and with ayong gentlewoman of singular beauty, derived from a most noble housein athens, and she named sophronia, aged about fifteen years. thismariage drawing neere, gisippus on a day, intreated titus to walkalong with him thither, because (as yet) he had not seene her.commingto the house, and she sitting in the midst betweene them, titusmaking himselfe a considerator of beauty, and especially on hisfriends behalfe; began to observe her very judicially, and everypart of her seemed so pleasing in his eie, that giving them al aprivat praise, yet answerable to their due deserving; he becam soenflamed with affection to her, as never any lover could bee moreviolentlie surprized, so sodainly doth beauty beguile our best senses.
after they had sate an indifferent while with her, they returnedhome to their lodging, where titus being alone in his chamber, beganto bethink himselfe on her, whose perfections had so powerfullypleased him: and the more he entred into this consideration, thefiercer he felt his desires enflamed, which being unable to quench, byany reasonable perswasions, after hee had vented foorth infinitesighes, thus he questioned with himselfe.most unhappie titus as thou art, whether doost thou transport thineunderstanding, love, and hope? dooest thou not know as well by thehonourable favours, which thou hast received of chremes and his house,as also the intire amity betweene thee and gisippus (unto whom fairesophronia is the afflanced friend) that thou shouldst holde her in thelike reverent respect, as if shee were thy true borne sister? darestthou presume to fancie her? whether shall beguiling love allurethee, and vaine immaging hopes carrie thee? open the eyes of thybetter understanding, and acknowledge thy selfe to bee a mostmiserable man. give way to reason, bridle thine intemperate appetites,reforme all irregulare desires, and guide thy fancy to a place ofbetter direction. resist thy wanton and lascivious will in thebeginning, and be master of thy selfe, while thou hast opportunity,for that which thou aimest at, is neyther reasonable nor honest. andif thou wert assured to prevaile upon this pursuite, yet thououghtst to avoide it, if thou hast any regard of true friendship,and the duty therein justly required. what wilt thou do then titus?fly from this inordinate affection, if thou wilt be reputed to be aman of sensible judgement.
after he had thus discoursed with himselfe, remembring sophronia,and converting his former allegations, into a quite contrarie sense,in utter detestation of them, and guided by his idle appetite, thus hebegan againe. the lawes of love are of greater force, then any otherwhatsoever, they not only breake the bands of friendship, but eventhose also of more divine consequence. how many times hath it binnoted, the father to affect his own daughter, the brother hissister, and the stepmother her son in law, matters far more monstrous,then to see one friend love the wife of another, a case happeningcontinually? moreover, i am yong, and youth is wholly subjected to thepassions of love: is it reasonable then, that those should be bardfrom me, which are fitting and pleasing to love? honest things, belongto men of more years and maturity, then i am troubled withall, and ican covet none, but onely those wherein love is directer. the beautyof sophronia is worthy of generall love, and if i that am a yongman dolove her, what man living can justly reprove me for it? shold not ilove her, because she is affianced to gisippus? that is no matter tome, i ought to love her, because she is a woman, and women werecreated for no other occasion, but to bee loved. fortune had sinned inthis case, and not i, in directing my frends affection to her,rather then any other; and if she ought to be loved, as herperfections do challenge, gisippus understanding that i affect her,may be the better contented that it is i, rather then any other.
with these, and the like crosse entercourses, he often mockthimselfe, falling into the contrary, and then to this againe, and fromthe contrary, into another kind of alteration, wasting and consuminghimselfe, not only this day and the night following, but many moreafterward, til he lost both his feeding and sleepe, so that throughdebility of body, he was constrained to keepe his bed. gisippus, whohad divers dayes noted his melancholly disposition, and now hisfalling into extreamitie of sicknesse, was very sorry to behold it:and with all meanes and inventions he could devise to use, hee bothquestioned the cause of this straunge alteration, and essayed everieway, how hee might best comfort him, never ceassing to demaunde areason, why he should become thus sad and sickely. but titus afterinfinite importuning (which still he answered) with idle and frivolousexcuses, farre from the truth indeede, and (to the no meane afflictionof his friend) when he was able to use no more contradictions; atlength, in sighes and teares, thus he replyed.
gisippus, were the gods so wel pleased, i could more gladly yeild todye, then continue any longer in this wretched life, considering, thatfortune hath brought mee to such an extremity, as proofe is now tobe made of my constancie and vertue; both which i finde conquered inme, to my eternall confusion and shame. but my best hope is, that ishal shortly be requited, as i have in justice deserved, namely withdeath, which will be a thousand times more welcome to me, then aloathed life, with remembrance of my base dejection in courage,which because i can no longer conceale from thee; not without blushingshame, i am well contented for to let thee know it.
then began hee to recount, the whole occasion of this straungeconflict in him, what a maine battaile hee had with his privatethoughts, confessing that they got the victory, causing him to diehourely for the love of sophronia, and affirming withall, that indue acknowledgement, how greatly hee had transgressed against thelawes of friendship, he thought no other penance sufficient for him,but onely death, which he willingly expected every houre, and with allhis heart would gladly bid welcome.
gisippus hearing this discourse, and seeing how titus bitterly wept,in agonies of most moving afflictions: sat an indifferent while sadand pensive, as being wounded with affection to sophronia, but yetin a well-governed and temperate manner without any long delaying, heeconcluded with himselfe; that the life of his friend ought to beaccounted much more deare, then any love hee could beare untosophronia: and in this resolution, the teares of titus forcing hiseyes to flow forth like two fountaines, thus he replyed.
titus, if thou hadst not neede of comfort, as plainly i see thouhast, i would justly complaine of thee to my selfe, as of the manwho hath violated our friendship, in keeping thine extreamitie so longtime concealed from mee, which hath beene overtedious for thee toendure. and although it might seeme to thee a dishonest case, andtherefore kept from the knowledge of thy friend, yet i plainly tellthee, that dishonest courses (in the league of amitie) deserve no moreconcealment, then those of the honestest nature. but leaving theseimpertinent wandrings, let us come to them of much greater necessitie.
if thou doest earnestly love faire sophronia, who is betroathedand afflanced to me, it is no matter for me to marvaile at: but ishould rather be much abashed, if thou couldst not intyrely affecther, knowing how beautifull she is, and the nobility of her minde,being as able to sustaine passion, as the thing pleasing is fullest ofexcellence. and looke how reasonable thou fanciest sophronia, asunjustly thou complainest of thy fortune, in ordaining her to be mywife, although thou doest not speake it expresly: as being of opinion,that thou mightst with more honesty love her, if she were anyothers, then mine. but if thou art so wise, as i have alwayes heldthee to be, tell me truely upon thy faith, to whom could fortunebetter guide her, and for which thou oughtest to be more thankfull,then in bestowing her on me? any other that had enjoyed her,although thy love were never so honest, yet he would better affect herhimselfe, then for thee, which thou canst not (in like manner) lookefor from me, if thou doest account me for thy friend, and asconstant now as ever.
reason is my warrant in this case, because i cannot remember,since first our entrance into friendship, that ever i enjoyed anything, but it was as much thine, as mine. and if our affaires had suchan equall course before, as otherwise they could not subsist; mustthey not now be kept in the same manner? can any thing moreperticularly appertaine to me, but thy right therein is as absolute asmine? i know not how thou maist esteeme of my friendship, if in anything concerning my selfe, i can plead my priviledge to be abovethine. true it is, that sophronia is affianced to me, and i love herdearely, daily expecting when our nuptials shall be celebrated. butseeing thou doest more fervently affect her, as being better able tojudge of the perfections, remaining in so excellent a creature asshe is, then i doe: assure thy selfe, and beleeve it constantly,that she shall come to my bed, not as my wife but onely thine. andtherefore leave these despairing thoughts, shake off this cloudydisposition, reassume thy former joviall spirit, with comfort and whatelse can content thee: in expectation of the happy houre, and the justrequitall of thy long, loving, and worthy friendship, which i havealwayes valued equall with mine owne life.
titus hearing this answer of gisippus, looke how much the sweet hopeof that which he desired gave him pleasure, as much both duty andreason affronted him with shame; setting before his eyes this duconsideration, that the greater the liberality of gisippus was,farre greater and unreasonable it appeared to him in disgrace, ifhee should unmannerly accept it. wherefore, being unable to refrainfrom teares, and with such strength as his weaknesse would give leave,thus he replyed.
gisippus, thy bounty and firme friendship suffereth me to seeapparantly, what (on my part) is no more then ought to be done. allthe gods forbid, that i should receive as mine, her whom they haveadjudged to be thine, by true respect of birth and desert. for if theyhad thought her a wife fit for me, doe not thou or any else imagine,that ever she should have beene granted to thee. use freelytherefore thine owne election, and the gracious favour wherewiththey have blessed thee: leave me to consume away in teares, a mourninggarment by them appointed for me, as being a man unworthy of suchhappinesse; for either i shall conquer this disaster, and that wilbe my crowne, or else will vanquish me, and free me from all paine:whereto gisippus presently thus answered.
worthy titus, if our amity would give me so much licence, as butto contend with my selfe, in pleasing thee with such a thing as idesire, and could also induce thee therein to be directed: it is theonely end whereat i aime, and am resolved to pursue it. in whichregard, let my perswasions prevaile with thee, and thereto i conjurethee, by the faith of a friend, suffer me to use mine authority,when it extendeth both to mine owne honour, and thy good, for i willhave sophronia to bee onely thine. i know sufficiently, how farrethe forces of love doe extend in power, and am not ignorant also,how not once or twice, but very many times, they have brought loversto unfortunate ends, as now i see thee very neere it, and so farregone, as thou art not able to turne backe againe, nor yet to conquerthine owne teares, but proceeding on further in this extremity, thouwilt be left vanquished, sinking under the burthen of lovestyrannicall oppression, and then my turne is next to follow thee.and therefore, had i no other reason to love thee, yet because thylife is deare to me, in regard of mine owne depending thereon; i standthe neerer thereto obliged. for this cause, sophronia must and shal bethine, for thou canst not find any other so conforme to thy fancy:albeit i who can easily convert my liking to another wife, but neverto have the like friend againe, shall hereby content both thee, and myselfe.
yet perhaps this is not a matter so easily done, or i to expressesuch liberality therein, if wives were to be found with the likedifficultie, as true and faithfull friends are: but, (being able torecover another wife) though never such a worthy friend; i ratherchuse to change, i doe not say loose her (for in giving her to thee, iloose her not my selfe) and by this change, make that which was goodbefore, tenne times better, and so preserve both thee and my selfe. tothis end therefore, if my prayers and perswasions have any powerwith thee, i earnestly entreat thee, that, by freeing thy selfe out ofthis affliction, thou wilt (in one instant) make us both truelycomforted, and dispose thy selfe (living in hope) to embrace thathappinesse, which the fervent love thou bearest to sophronia, hathjustly deserved.
now although titus was confounded with shame, to yeeld consent, thatsophronia should be accepted as his wife, and used many obstinateresistances: yet notwithstanding, love pleading on the one sidepowerfully, and gisippus as earnestly perswading on the other, thus heanswered. gisippus, i know not what to say, neither how to behave myselfe in this election, concerning the fitting of mine contentment, orpleasing thee in thy importunate perswasion. but seeing thy liberalityis so great, as it surmounteth all reason or shame in me, i will yeeldobedience to thy more then noble nature. yet let this remaine forthine assurance, that i doe not receive this grace of thine, as aman not sufficiently understanding, how i enjoy from thee, not onelyher whom most of all i doe affect, but also doe hold my very life ofthee. grant then you greatest gods (if you be the patrones of thismine unexpected felicitie) that with honor and due respect, i mayhereafter make apparantly knowne: how highly i acknowledge this thywonderfull favour, in being more mercifull to me, then i could be tomy selfe.
for abridging of all further circumstances, answered gisippus, andfor easier bringing this matter to full effect, i hold this to beour onely way. it is not unknowne to thee, how after much discoursehad between my kindred, and those belonging to sophronia, thematrimoniall conjunction was fully agreed on, and therefore, if nowi shall flye off, and say, i will not accept thee as my wife: greatscandall would arise thereby, and make much trouble among our friends,which could not be greatly displeasing to me, if that were the wayto make her thine. but i rather stand in feare, that if i forsakeher in such peremptory sort, her kinred and friends will bestow her onsome other, and so she is utterly lost, without all possible meanes ofrecovery. for prevention therefore of all sinister accidents, i thinkeit best, (if thy opinion jumpe with mine) that i still pursue thebusines, as already i have begun, having thee alwaies in my company,as my dearest friend and onely associate. the nuptials being performedwith our friends, in secret manner at night (as we can cunninglyenough contrive it) thou shalt have her maiden honour in bed, evenas if she were thine owne wife. afterward, in apt time and place, wewill publiquely make knowne what is done; if they take it well, wewill be as jocond as they: if they frowne and waxe offended, thedeed is done, over-late to be recalled, and so perforce they must restcontented.
you may well imagine, this advise was not a little pleasing totitus, wherupon gisippus received home sophronia into his house,with publike intention to make her his wife, according as was thecustome then observed, and titus being perfectly recovered, waspresent at the feast very ceremonially observed. when night wascome, the ladies and gentlewomen conducted sophronia to thebride-chamber, where they left her in her husbands bed, and thendeparted all away. the chamber wherein titus used to lodge, joynedclose to that of gisippus, for their easier accesse each to the other,at all times whensoever they pleased, and gisippus being alone inthe bride-chamber, preparing as if he were comming to bed:extinguishing the light, he went softly to titus, willing him to goeto bed to his wife. which titus hearing, overcome with shame andfeare, became repentant, and denyed to goe. but gisippus, being a trueintyre friend indeed, and confirming his words with actions: after alittle lingring dispute, sent him to the bride, and so soone as he wasin the bed with her, taking sophronia gently by the hand, softly hemoved the usuall question to her, namely, if she were willing to behis wife.
she beleeving verily that he was gisippus, modestly answered. sir, ihave chosen you to be my husband, reason requires then, that ishould be willing to be your wife. at which words, a costly ring,which gisippus used daily to weare, he put upon her finger, saying.with this ring, i confesse my selfe to be your husband, and bind you(for ever) my spouse and wife; no other kind of marriage wasobserved in those dayes, and so he continued all the night with her,she never suspecting him to be any other then gisippus, and thus wasthe marriage consumated, betweene titus and sophronia, albeit thefriends (on either side) thought otherwise.
by this time, publius, the father of titus, was departed out of thismortall life, and letters came to athens, that with all speed heshould returne to rome, to take order for occasions there concerninghim; wherefore he concluded with gisippus about his departure, andtaking sophronia thither with him, which was no easie matter to bedone, until it were first known, how occasions had bin caried amongthem. wherupon, calling her one day into her chamber, they told herentirely, how all had past, which titus confirmed substantially, bysuch direct passages betweene themselves, as exceeded allpossibility of denyall, and moved in her much admiration; looking eachon other very discontentedly, she heavily weeping and lamenting, andgreatly complaining of gisippus, for wronging her so unkindly.
but before any further noyse was made in the house, shee went to herfather, to whom, as also to her mother, shee declared the wholetrecherie, how much both they and their other friends were wrongedby gisippus, avouching her selfe to be the wife of titus, and not ofgisippus, as they supposed. these newes were highly displeasing to thefather of sophronia, who with hir kinred, as also those of gisippus,made great complaints to the senate, very dangerous troubles andcommotions arising daily betweene them, drawing both gisippus andsophronia into harsh reports; he being generally reputed, not onelyworthy of all bitter reproofe, but also the severest punishment.neverthelesse, hee maintained publikely what he had done, avouching itfor an act both of honour and honestie, wherewith sophronia'sfriends had no reason to bee offended, but rather to take it in verythankfull part, having married a man of farre greater worth andrespect, than himselfe was, or could be.
on the other side, titus hearing these uncivill acclamations, becamemuch moved and provoked at them, but knowing it was a custome observedamong the greeks, to be so much the more hurried away with rumours andthreatnings, as lesse they finde them to be answered, and when theyfinde them, shew themselves not onely humble enough, but rather asbase men, and of no courage; he resolved with himselfe, that theirbraveries were no longer to be enclured, without some bold and manlyanswere. and having a romane heart, as also an athenian understanding,by politique perswasions, he caused the kinred of gisippus andsophronia, to be assembled in a temple, and himselfe commingthither, accompanied with none but gisippus onely, he began to deliverhis minde before them all, in this manner following.
"many philosophers doe hold opinion, that the actions performed bymortall men, doe proceed from the disposing and ordination of theimmortall gods. whereupon some doe maintaine, that things which bedone, or never are to be done, proceed of necessity: howbeit someother doe hold, that this necessity is onely referred to thingsdone. both which opinions (if they be considered with mature judgment)doe most manifestly approve, that they who reprehend any thing whichis irrevocable, doe nothing else but shew themselves, as if theywere wiser then the gods, who we are to beleeve, that withperpetuall reason, and void of any error, doe dispose and governe bothus, and all our actions; in which respect, how foolish andbeast-like a thing it is, presumptuously to checke or controuletheir operations, you may very easily consider; and likewise, howjustly they deserve condigne punishment, who suffer themselves to betransported in so temerarious a manner.
"in which notorious transgression, i understand you all to beguiltie, if common fame speake truely, concerning the marriage of myselfe and sophronia, whom you imagined as given to gisippus; for younever remember that it was so ordained from eternitie, shee to bemine, and no wife for gisippus, as at this instant is made manifest byfull effect. but because the kinde of speaking, concerning divineprovidence, and intention of the gods, may seeme a difficult matter tomany, and somewhat hard to bee understood: i am content to presuppose,that they meddle not with any thing of ours, and will onely stay myselfe on humane reasons, and in this nature of speech, i shall beenforced to doe two things, quite contrary to my naturall disposition.the one is, to speake somewhat in praise and commendation of my selfe:and the other, justly to blame and condemne other mens seemingestimation. but because both in the one and the other, i doe notintend to swerve a jot from the truth, and the necessitie of thepresent case in question, doth not onely require, but also command it,you must pardon what i am to say.
"your complaints doe proceed, rather from furie then reason, and(with continuall murmurings, or rather seditions) slander,backe-bite and condemne gisippus, because (of his owne free will andnoble disposition) hee gave her to be my wife, whom (by your election)was made his; wherein i account him most highly praiseworthy: andthe reasons inducing mee thereunto, are these. the first, because hehath performed no more then what a friend ought to doe: and thesecond, in regard he hath dealt more wisely, then you did. i have nointention, to display (at this present) what the sacred law ofamitie requireth, to be acted by one friend towards another, itshall suffice mee onely to informe you, that the league offriendship (farre stronger then the bond of bloud and kinred)confirmed us in our election of either at the first, to be true,loyall and perpetuall friends; whereas that of kinred, commeth onelyby fortune or chance. and therefore if gisippus affected more my life,then your benevolence, i being ordained for his friend, as iconfesse my selfe to be; none of you ought to wonder thereat, inregard it is no matter of mervaile.
"but let us come now to our second reason, wherein, with farregreater instance i will shew you, that he hath (in this occasion)shewen himselfe to be much more wise, then you did, or have done:because it plainely appeareth, that you have no feeling of thedivine providence, and much lesse knowledge in the effects offriendship. i say, that your foresight, councell and deliberation,gave sophronia to gisippus, a yong gentleman, and a philosopher:gisippus likewise hath given her to a yong gentleman, and aphilosopher, as himselfe is. your discretion gave her to anathenian; the gift of gisippus, is to a romaine. yours, to a noble andhonest man; that of gisippus, to one more noble by race, and nolesse honest then himselfe. your judgement hath bestowed her on a richyoung man: gisippus hath given her to one farre richer. yourwisedome gave her to one who not onely loved her not, but also onethat had no desire to know her: gisippus gave her unto him, who, aboveall felicitie else, yea, more than his owne life, both entirelyloved and desired her.
"now, for proofe of that which i have said, to be most true andinfallible, and that his deede deserveth to bee much more commendedthen yours, let it bee duely considered on, point by point. that iam a young man and a philosophe, as gisippus is; my yeares, face,and studies, without seeking after further proofe, doth sufficientlytestifie: one selfe-same age is both his and mine, in like qualityof course have wee lived and studied together. true it is, that hee isan athenian, and i am a romaine. but if the glory of these twocities should bee disputed on: then let mee tell you, that i am of acitie that is francke and free, and hee is of a tributarie citie. isay that i am of a citie, which is chiefe lady and mistresse of thewhole world and hee is of a citie subject to mine. i say that i amof a citie, that is strong in arms, empire, and studies: whereas hiscan commend it selfe but for studies onely. and although you seemeheere to bee a scholler, in appearance meane enough, yet i am notdescended of the simplest stocke in rome.
"my houses and publique places, are filled with the ancientstatues of my predecessors, and the annales recorde the infinitetriumphs of the quintij, brought home by them into the romanecapitole, and yeares cannot eate out the glory of our name, but itwill live and flourish to all posteritie.
"modest shame makes me silent in my wealth and possessions, my mindetruely telling mee, that honest contented povertie, is the mostancient and richest inheritance, of our best and noblest romanes,which opinion, if it bee condemned by the understanding of theignorant multitude, and heerein wee shall give way to them bypreferring riches and worldly treasures, then i can say that i amaboundantly provided, not as ambitious, or greedily covetous, butsufficiently stored with the goods of fortune.
"i know well enough, that you held it as a desired benefit, gisippusbeing a native of your citie, should also be linked to you byalliance: but i know no reason, why i should not be as neere and deereto you at rome, as if i lived with you heere. considering, when i amthere, you have a ready and well wishing friend, to stead you in allbeneficiall and serviceable offices, as carefull and provident foryour support, yea, a protectour of you and your affaires, as wellpublique as particular. who is it then, not transported withpartiall affection, that can (in reason) more approve your act, thenthat which my friend gisippus hath done? questionlesse, not any one,as i thinke. sophronia is married to titus quintus fulvius, a noblegentleman by antiquitie, a rich citizen of rome, and (which is aboveall) the friend of gisippus: therfore, such a one as thinkes itstrange, is sorrie for it, or would not have it to be; knoweth notwhat he doth.
"perhaps there may be some, who will say, they doe not so muchcomplain, that sophronia is the wife to titus; but of the mannerwhereby it was done, as being made his wife secretly, and by theft,not any of her parents, kinred or friends called thereto: no, nor somuch as advertised thereof. why gentlemen, this is no miraculousthing, but heeretofore hath oftentimes happened, and therefore nonoveltie.
"i cannot count unto you, how many there have beene, who (againstthe will of their fathers) have made choice of their husbands; northem that have fled away with their lovers into strange countries,being first friends, before they were wives:
nor of them who have sooner made testimonie of marriage by theirbellies, then those ceremonies due to matrimonie, or publicationthereof by the tongue; so that meere necessity and constraint, hathforced the parents to yeeld consent: which hath not so happened tosophronia, for she was given to me by gisippus discreetly, honestly,and orderly.
"others also may say, that shee is married to him, to whom itbelonged not to marrie her. these complaints are foolish, andwomanish, proceeding from verie little, or no consideration at all. inthese daies of ours, fortune makes no use of novell or inconsideratemeanes, whereby to bring matters to their determined effect. whyshould it offend me, if a cobler, rather than a scholler, hath ended abusinesse of mine, either in private or publique, if the end be wellmade? well i may take order, if the cobler bee indiscreet, that heemeddle no more with any matters of mine, yet i ought, in courtesie, tothanke him for that which hee did.
"in like manner, if gisippus hath married sophronia well, it isfoolish and superfluous, to finde fault with the manner hee used inher marriage. if you mislike his course in the case, beware of himhereafter, yet thanke him because it is no worse. "neverthelesse,you are to understand, that i sought not by fraud or deceit, (butonely by witte) any opportunitie, whereby any way to sullie thehonestie and cleere nobilitie of your bloud, in the person ofsophronia: for although in secret i made her my wife, yet i came notas an enemie, to take her perforce, nor (like a ravisher) wrongedher virginitie, to blemish your no. titles, or despising youralliance. but fervently, enflamed by her bright beauty, and incitedalso by her unparalleld vertues, i shaped my course; knowing wellenough, that if i tooke the ordinarie way of wiving, by moving thequestion to you, i should never winne your consent, as fearing, lest iwould take her with me to rome, and so conveigh out of your sight, ajewell by you so much esteemed, as she is.
"for this, and no other reason, did i presume to use the secretcunning which now is openly made knowne unto you: and gisippusdisposed himselfe thereunto, which otherwise hee never determined tohave done, in contracting the marriage for me, and shee consentingto me in his name.
moreover, albeit most earnestly i affected her, i sought toprocure your union, not like a lover, but as a true husband, nor wouldi immodestly touch her, till first (as her selfe can testifie) withthe words becomming wedlocke, and the ring also i espoused her,demanding of her, if shee would accept mee as her husband, and sheeanswered mee, with her full consent. wherein, if it may seeme thatshee was deceived, i am not any way to be blamed, but she, for notdemanding, what, and who i was.
this then is the great evill, the great offence, and the greatinjurie committed by my friend gisippus, and by mee as a lover: thatsophronia is secretly become the wife of titus quintus fulvius. andfor this cause, like spies you watch him, threaten him daily, as ifyou intended to teare him in pieces. what could you doe more, if heehad given her to a man of the very vilest condition? to a villaine, toa slave? what prisons? what fetters? or what torments are sufficientfor this fact? but leaving these frivolous matters, let us come todiscourse of more moment, and better beseeming your attention.
the time is come, that i may no longer continue heere, becausepublius my father is dead, and i must needs returne to rome, whereforebeing minded to take sophronia thither with mee, i was the morewilling to acquaint you therewith, as also what else i have said,which otherwise had still beene concealed from you. nor can you buttake it in good part, if you be wise, and rest well contented withwhat is done: considering, if i had any intention eyther to deceive,or otherwise wrong you, i could have basely left her, and made ascorne both of her and you, you not having any power to stay meeheere. but the gods will never permitte that any couragious romane,should ever conceive so vile and degenerate a thought.
sophronia, by ordination of the gods, by force of humane lawes,and by the laudable consent of my friend gisippus, as also thepowerfull command of love is mine. but you perchance, imagining yourselves to be wiser then the gods, or any other men whatsoever; maythinke ill of it, and more brutishly then beasts, condemne theirworking in two kinds, which would be offensive to mee. the one is,your detaining of sophronia from mee, of whom you have no power, butwhat pleaseth mee. the other, is your bitter threatnings againstgisippus my deare friend, to whom you are in duty obliged. in bothwhich cases, how unreasonablie soever you carrie your selves, i intendnot at this time to presse any further. but rather let mee counsellyou like a friend, to cease your hatred and disdaine, and suffersophronia to be delivered mee, that i may depart contentedly fromyou as a kinsman, and (being absent) remaine your friend: assuringyou, that whether what is done shall please or displease you, if youpurpose to proceed any otherwise: i will take gisippus along with me,,and when i come to rome, take such sure order, to fetch her hence, whoin justice is mine, even in meere despight of you all, and then youshall feele by sound experience, how powerfull is the just indignationof the wronged romanes."
when titus had thus concluded his oration, he arose with a sterneand discontented countenance, and tooke gisippus by the hand,plainly declaring, that he made small account of all the rest thatwere in the temple; and shaking his head at them, rather menacedthen any other wise seemed to care for them.
they which tarried, when they were gone, considering partly on thereasons alleadged by titus, and partly terrified by his latestspeeches; became induced, to like well of his alliance and amitie,as (with common consent) they concluded: that it was much better toaccept titus as their kinsman (seeing gisippus had made manifestrefusall thereof) than to lose the kinred of the one, and procurethe hatred of the other. wherefore they went to seeke titus, andsaid unto him, they were very well contented that sophronia should beehis wife, hee their deare and loving kinsman, and gisippus toremaine their much respected friend. and embracing one another, makinga solemne feast, such as in the like cases is necessarilie required,they departed from him, presently sending sophronia to him, who makinga vertue of necessity, converted her love (in short time after) totitus, in as effectuall manner, as formerly shee had done to gisippus,and so was sent away with him to rome, where she was received andwelcommed with very great honour.
gisippus remaining still at athens, in small regard of eyther theirsor his owne friends: not long after by meanes of sundry troublesomecitizens; and partialities happening among the common people, wasbanished from athens, and hee, as also all his familie, condemned toperpetuall exile: during which tempestuous time, gisippus was becomenot onely wretchedly poore, but wandred abroad as a common begger;in which miserable condition he travelled to rome, to try if tituswould take any acknowledgement of him. understanding that he wasliving, and one most respected among the romanes, as being a greatcommander and a senator: he enquired for the place where hee dwelt,and going to be neere about his house, stayed there so long, tilltitus came home, yet not daring to manifest himselfe, or speake a wordto him, in regard of his poore and miserable estate, but strove tohave him see him, to the end, that hee might acknowledge and callhim by his name; notwithstanding, titus passed by him without eitherspeech, or looking on him: which when gisippus perceived, and makingfull account, that (at the least) he would remember him, in regardof former courtesies, done to him: confounded with griefe anddesperate thoughtes, hee departed thence, never meaning to see him anymore.
now, in regard it was night, he having eaten nothing all that day,nor provided of one penny to buy him any food, wandred he knew notwhether, desiring rather to die than live; hee came at last to anold ruinous part of the city, over-spred with briers and bushes, andseldome resorted unto by any: where finding a hollow cave or vault, heentred into it, meaning there to weare away the comfortlesse night,and laying himselfe downe on the hard ground, almost starke naked, andwithout any warme garments, over-wearied with weeping, at last he fellinto a sleepe.
it fortuned that two men, who had beene abroad the same night,committing thefts and robberies together; somwhat very earlie in themorning, came to the same cave, intending there to share and dividetheir booties, and difference happening betweene them about it, heethat was the stronger person, slew there the other, and then went awaywith the whole purchase.
gisippus having heard and seene the manner of this accident, was nota little joyfull, because he had now found a way to death, withoutlaying any violent hand on himselfe; for life being very loathsometo him, it was his only desire to die. wherfore, he would not budgefrom the place, but taried there so long, till the sergeants andofficers of justice (by information of him that did the deede) camethither well attended, and furiously ledde gisippus thence to prison.
being examined concerning this bloudy fact, he plainly confessed,that hee himselfe had committed the murder, and afterward would notdepart from the cave, but purposely stayed for apprehension, asbeing truely toucht with compunction for so foule an offence: uponwhich eremptorie confession, marcus varro being then praetor, gavesentence that he should be crucified on a crosse, as it was the usuallmanner of death in those dayes. titus chancing to come at the sametime into praetorium, advisedly beholding the face of the condemnedman (as hee sate upon the bench) knew him to bee gysippus, not alittle wondring at this strange accident, the povertie of hisestate, and what occasion should bring him thither, especially inthe questioning for his life, and before the tribunall of justice.
his soule earnestly thirsting, by all possible meanes to helpe anddefend him, and no other course could now be taken for safetie ofhis life, but by accusing himselfe, to excuse and cleare the otherof the crime: hee stept from off the judgement bench, and croudingthrough the throng to the barre, called out to the praetor in thismanner. marcus varro, recall thy sentence given on the condemned mansent away, because hee is truely guiltlesse and innocent: with onebloudie blow have i offended the gods, by killing that wretched man,whom the serjeants found this morning slaine, wherefore noble praetor,let no innocent mans bloud be shed for it, but onely mine that haveoffended.
marcus varro stood like a man confounded with admiration, being verysorrie, for that which the whole assistants had both seene andheard, yet hee could not (with honour) desist from what must needsbe done, but would performe the lawes severe injunction. and sendingfor condemned gisippus backe againe, in the presence of titus, thus hespake to him. how becamest thou so madly incensed, as (without anytorment inflicted on thee) to confesse an offence by thee nevercommitted? art thou wearie of thy life? thou chargest thy selfefalsly, to be the person who this last night murdered the man in thecave, and there is another that voluntarily also doth confesse hisguiltinesse.
gisippus lifting up his eyes, and perceiving it was titus, conceivedimmediately, that he had done this onely for his deliverance, as onethat remembred him sufficiently, and would not be ungratefull forformer kindnesses received. wherefore, the teares flowing abundantlydown his cheekes, he said to the judge varro, it was none but i thatmurdered the man, wherefore, i commiserate the case of this noblegentleman titus, who speakes now too late for the safety of my life.titus on the other side, said. noble praetor, this man (as thou seest)is a stranger heere, and was found without any weapon, fast asleepe bythe dead body: thou mayst then easily perceive, that meerely themiserable condition wherein he is, hath made him desperate, and hewould make mine offence the occasion of his death. absolve him, andsend me to the crosse, for none but i have deserved to die for thisfact.
varro was amazed, to observe with what earnest instance each of themstrove to excuse the other, which halfe perswaded him in his soule,that they were both guiltlesse. and as he was starting-up, with fullintent to acquaint them: a yong man, who had stood there all thiswhile, and observed the hard pleading on either side; he crowdedinto the barre, being named publius ambustus, a fellow of lewd life,and utterly out of hopes, as being debauched in all his fortunes,and knowne among the romaines to be a notorious theefe, who verily hadcommitted the murder. well knew his conscience, that none of them wereguilty of the crime, wherewith each so wilfully charged himselfe:being therefore truely toucht with remorse, he stept before marcusvarro, saying.
honourable praetor, mine owne horrid and abominable actions, haveinduced me thus to intrude my selfe, for clearing the strictcontention betweene these two persons. and questionlesse, some godor greater power, hath tormented my wretched soule, and socompunctually solicited me, as i cannot chuse, but make openconfession of my sinne. here therefore, i doe apparantly publish, thatneither of these men is guilty of the offence, wherewith so wilfullyeach chargeth himselfe. i am the villaine, who this morning murderedthe man in the cave, one of no greater honesty then my selfe, andseeing this poore man lie there sleeping, while we were dividing thestolne booties betweene us; i slew my companyon, because i would bethe sole possessor. as for noble lord titus, he had no reason thusto accuse himselfe, because [he] is a man of no such base quality: letthem both then be delivered, and inflict the sentence of death on me.
octavius caesar, to whom tydings was brought of this rareaccident, commanding them al three to be brought before him; wouldneeds understand the whole history, in every particular as all hadhappened, which was substantially related to him. whereupon,octavius pleased them all three: the two noble friendes, becausethey were innocent, and the third, for openly revealing the verytruth.
titus tooke home with him his friend gisippus, and after he hadsharpely reproved him for his distrust, and cold credence of hisfriendship: he brought him to sophronia, who welcomed him as lovingly,as if he had bin her naturall borne brother, bemoaning his hard anddisastrous fortune, and taking especiall care, to convert all passeddistresses, into as happy and comfortable a change, fitting him withgarments and attendants, beseeming his degree both in nobility andvertue. titus, out of his honourable bounty, imparted halfe hislands and rich possessions to him, and afterward gave him in marriage,his owne sister, a most beautifull lady, named fulvia, saying to himbeside. my deare friend gisippus, it remaineth now in thine owneelection, whether thou wilt live here still with me, or returnebacke to athens, with all the wealth which i have bestowed on thee.but gisippus, being one way constrayned, by the sentence of banishmentfrom his native city, and then againe, in regard of the constant love,which he bare to so true and thankefull friend as titus was: concludedto live there as a loyall roman, where he with his fulvia, and tituswith his faire sophronia, lived long after together in one and thesame house, augmenting daily (if possible it might be) their amitybeyond all other equalizing.
a most sacred thing therefore is (ordiall amity, worthy not onely ofsinguler reverence, but also to be honoured with eternallcommendation, as being the onely wise mother of all magnificence andhonesty, the sister of charity and gratitude, the enemy to hatredand avarice, and which is alwayes ready (without attending to berequested) to extend all vertuous actions to others, which she wouldhave done to her selfe. her rare and divine effects, in these contrarytimes of ours, are not to be found between two such persons, whichis a mighty fault, and greatly checketh the miserable covetousnesse ofmen, who respecting nothing but onely their particular benefit; havebanished true amity, to the utmost confines of the whole earth, andsent her into perpetuall exile.
what love, what wealth, or affinity of kindred, could have madegisippus feele (even in the intyrest part of his soule) the ferventcompassion, the teares, the sighes of titus, and with such efficacy asplainely appeared: to make him consent, that his faire elected spouse,by him so dearely esteemed, should become the wife of his companion,but onely the precious league of amity?
what lawes, what threatnings, what feares, could cause the yongarmes of gisippus to abstaine embraces, betaking himselfe tosolitary walkes, and obscure places, when in his owne bedde, hemight have enjoyed so matchlesse a beauty (who perhaps desired it somuch as himselfe) but onely the gracious title of amity? whatgreatnesse, what merits or precedence, could cause gisippus not tocare, for the losse of his kindred, those of sophronia, yea, ofsophronia her selfe, not respecting the dishonest murmurings of baseminded people, their vile and contemptible language, scornes andmockeries, and all to content and satisfie a friend, but onelydivine amity?
come now likewise to the other side. what occasions could compellnoble titus, so promptly and deliberatly, to procure his owne death,to rescue his friend from the crosse, and inflict the pain and shameupon himselfe, pretending not [to] see or know gisippus at all, had itnot bin wrought by powerfull amity? what cause else could make titusso liberall, in dividing (with such willingnesse) the larger part ofhis patrimony to gisippus, when fortune had dispossest him of hisowne, but onely heaven-borne amity? what else could have procuredtitus, without any further dilation, feare or suspition, to give hissister fulvia in marriage to gisippus, when he saw him reduced to suchextreame poverty, disgrace and misery, but onely infinite amity? towhat end doe men care then, to covet and procure great multitudes ofkinred, store of brethren, numbers of children, and to encrease(with their owne monyes) plenty of servants: when by the least losseand dammage happening, they forget all duty to father, brother, ormaster? amity and true friendship is of a quite contrary nature,satisfying (in that sacred bond) the obligation due to all degrees,both of parentage, and all alliences else.
the tenth day, the ninth novell
declaring what an honourable vertue courtesie is, in them
that truely know how to use them
saladine, the great soldan of babylon, in the habite of amerchant, was honourably received and welcommed, into the house ofsignior thorello d'istria. who travelling to the holy land, prefixed acertaine time to his wife, for his returne back to her againe,wherein, if he failed, it was lawfull for her to take another husband.by clouding himselfe in the disguise of a faulkner, the soldan tookenotice of him, and did him many great honours. afterward, thorellofalling sicke, by magicall art, he was conveighed in one night topavia, when his wife was to be married on the morrow: where makinghimselfe knowne to her, all was disappointed, and shee went homewith him to his owne house.
adam philomena having concluded her discourse, and the rareacknowledgement, which titus made of his esteemed friend gisippus,extolled justly as it deserved by all the company: the king, reservingthe last office to dioneus (as it was at the first granted him)began to speake thus. without all question to the contrary (worthyladies) nothing can be more truely said, then what madame philomena,hath delivered, concerning amity, and her complaint in theconclusion of her novell, is not without great reason, to see it soslenderly reverenced and respected (now a dayes) among all men. but ifwe had met here in duty onely for correcting the abuses of iniquity,and the malevolent courses of this preposterous age; i could proceedfurther in this just cause of complaint. but because our end aimeth atmatters of other nature, it commeth to my memory to tel you of ahistory, which (perhaps) may seeme somewhat long, but altogetherpleasant, concerning a magnificent act of great saladine: to theend, that by observing those things which you shall heare in mynovell, if we cannot (by reason of our manifold imperfections)intirely compasse the amity of any one; yet (at least) we may takedelight, in stretching our kindnesse (in good deeds) so farre as weare able, in hope one day after, some worthy reward will ensuethereon, as thereto justly appertaining.
let me tell you then, that (as it is afermed by many) in the time ofthe emperour frederick, first of that name, the christians, for thebetter recovery of the holy land, resolved to make a generall voyageover the seas. which being understood by saladine, a very worthyprince, and then soldan of babylon: he concluded with himselfe, thathe would (in person) goe see, what preparation the christianpotentates made for this warre, that hee might the better providefor himselfe. having setled all things orderly in aegypt for thebusines, and making an outward appearance, as if he purposed apilgrimage to mecha: he set onward on his journey, habited like amerchant, attended onely with two of his most noble and wisestbaschaes, and three waiting servants.
when he had visited many christian provinces, and was ridingthorow lombardle, to passe the mountaines; it fortuned, in hisjourneying from millaine to pavia, and the day being very farre spent,so that night hastened speedily on him: he met with a gentleman, namedsignior thorella d'istria, but dwelling at pavia, who with his men,hawkes and hounds, went to a house of his, seated in a singular place,and on the river of ticinum. signior thorello seeing such men makingtowardes him, presently imagined, that they were somegentle-strangers, and such hee desired to respect with honor.
wherefore, saladine demanding of one of thorelloes men, how farre(as then) it was to pavia, and whether they might reach thither bysuch an houre, as would admit their entrance into the citty:thorello would not suffer his servant to returne the answer, butreplyed thus himselfe. sir (quoth he) you cannot reach pavia, butnight will abridge you of any entraunce there. i beseech you then sir,answered saladine, favour us so much (because we are all strangersin these parts) as to tell us where we may be well lodged. that shal isir, said thorello, and very gladly too.
even at the instant sir, as we met with you, i had determined inmy mind, to send one of my servants somewhat neere to pavia, about abusinesse concerning my selfe: he shall go along with you, and conductyou to a place, where you will be very well entertayned. so,stepping to him, who was of best discretion amongst his men, he gaveorder to him what should bee done, and sent him with them. himselfe,making hast by a farre neerer way, caused supper to be prepared inworthy manner, and the tables to be covered in his garden; and allthings being in good readinesse, he sate downe at his doore, to attendthe comming of his guests. the servingman, discoursing with thegentlemen on divers occasions, guided them by such unusuallpassages, as (before they could discerne it) he brought them to hismasters house; where so soone as thorello saw them arrived, he wentforth to meet them, assuring them all of most hearty welcome.
saladine, who was a man of accute understanding, did wellperceive, that this knight thorello misdoubted his going with him,if (when he met him) hee should have invited him; and therefore,because he would not be denied, of entertaining him into his house; hemade choise of this kinde and honourable course, which caused him toreturne this answer. gentle sir, if courtesie in one man to another,do deserve condemning, then may we justly complaine of you, whomeeting us upon the way, which you have shortened by your kindnesse,and which we are no way able to deserve, wee are constrained toaccept, taking you to bee the mirrour of courtesie. thorello being aknight of ingenious apprehension, and wel languaged, replyed thus.
gentlemen; this courtesie (seeing you terme it so) which you receiveof me, in regard of that justly belonging to you, as your faces dosufficiently informe mee, is matter of very slender account. butassuredly out of pavia, you could not have any lodging, deserving tobe termed good. and therefore let it not bee displeasing to you, ifyou have a little gone forth of the common rode way, to have yourentertainment somewhat bettered, as many travaylers are easily inducedto do.
having thus spoken, all the people of the house shewed themselves,in serviceable manner to the gentlemen, taking their horses as theydismounted, and thorello himselfe, conducted the three gentlemen, intothree severall faire chambers, which in costly maner were prepared forthem, where their boots were pluckt off, faire napkins with manchetslay ready, and delicate wines to refresh their wearied spirits, muchprety conference being entercoursed, til supper time invited themthence.
saladine, and they that were with him, spake the latine tonguevery readily, by which meanes they were the better understoode; andthorello seemed (in their judgement) to bee the most gracious,compleate, and best spoken gentleman, as ever they met with in alltheir journey. it appeared also (on the other side) to signiourthorello, that his guests were men of great merit, and worthy ofmuch more esteeme, then there he could use towards them: wherefore, itdid highly distast him, that he had no more friends there this nightto keepe them company, or himselfe better provided for theirentertainment, which hee intended (on the morrow) to recompence withlarger amends at dinner.
heereupon, having instructed one of his men with what heeintended, he sent him to pavia, which was not farre off (and wherehe kept no doore shut) to his wife, named madam adialetta; a womansingularly wise, and of a noble spirit, needing little or nodirection, especially when she knew her husbands minde. as they werewalking in the garden, thorello desired to understand, of whence,and what they were? whereto saladine thus answered. sir, wee arecyprian marchants, comming now from cyprus, and are travalling toparis, about affaires of importance. now trust me syr, replyedthorello, i could heartily wish, that this countrey of ours wouldyeeld such gentlemen, as your cyprus affordeth marchants. so,falling from one discourse unto another, supper was served in; andlooke howe best themselves pleased, so they sate at the table, where(we need make no doubt) they were respected in honourable order.
so soone as the tables were withdrawne, thorello knowing theymight be weary, brought them againe to their chambers, wherecommitting them to their good rest, himselfe went to bed sooneafter. the servant sent to pavia, delivered the message to his lady;who, not like a woman of ordinary disposition, but rather truelyroyall, sent thorelloes servants into the city, to make preparationfor a feast indeed, and with lighted torches (because it wassomewhat late) they invited the very greatest and noblest persons ofthe citie, all the roomes being hanged with the richest arras, clothesand golde worke, velvets, silkes, and all other rich adornments, insuch manner as her husband had commanded, and answerable to her owneworthy mind, being no way to learne, in what manner to entertainestrangers.
on the morrow morning, the gentlemen arose, and mounting onhorsebacke with signior thorello, he called for his hawkes and hounds,brought them to the river, where he shewed two or three faire flights:but saladine desiring to know, which was the fayrest hostery in allpavia, thorello answered. gentlemen, i wil shew you that my selfe,in regard i have occasion to ride thither. which they beleeving,were the better contented, and rode on directly unto pavia; arrivingthere about nine of the clocke, and thinking he guided them to thebest inne, he brought them to his owne house; where, above fifty ofthe worthiest citizens, stood ready to welcome the gentlemen,imbracing them as they lighted from their horsses. which saladine, andhis associates perceiving, they guessed as it was indeede, andsaladine sayd. beleeve me worthy thorello, this is not answerable tomy demand; you did too much yester night, and much more then wecould desire or deserve: wherefore, you might wel be the soonerdischarged of us, and let us travaile on our journey.
noble gentlemen, replyed thorello (for in mine eye you seeme nolesse) that courtesie which you met with yester-night, i am tothanke fortune for, more then you, because you were then straited bysuch necessity, as urged your acceptance of my poore country house.but now this morning, i shall account my selfe much beholding to you(as the like will all these worthy gentlemen here about you) if you dobut answer kindnes with kindnes, and not refuse to take a homelydinner with them.
saladine and his friends, being conquerd with such potentperswasions, and already dismounted from their horses, saw that alldeniall was meerly in vaine: and therefore thankfully condiscending(after some few ceremonious complements were over-past) thegentlemen conducted them to their chambers, which were mostsumptuously prepared for them, and having laid aside their ridinggarments, being a little re reshed with cakes and choice wines; theydescended into the dining hall, the pompe whereof i am not able toreport.
when they had washed, and were seated at the tables, dinner wasserved in most magnificent sort; so that if the emperor himself hadbin there, he could not have bin more sumptuously served. and althoughsaladine and his baschaes were very noble lords, and wonted to seematters of admiration: yet could they do no lesse now, but ratherexceeded in marvaile, considering the qualitie of the knight, whomthey knew to bee a citizen, and no prince or great lord. dinnerbeing ended, and divers familiar conferences passing amongst them:because it was exceeding hot, the gentlemen of pavia (as it pleasedthorello to appoint) went to repose themselves awhile, and hekeeping company with his three guests, brought them into a goodlychamber, where, because he would not faile in the least scruple ofcourtesie, or conceale from them the richest jewell which he had; hesent for his lady and wife, because (as yet) they had not seene her.
she was a lady of extraordinary beauty, tall stature, verysumptuously attired, and having two sweet sonnes (resembling angels)she came with them waiting before her, and graciously saluted herguests.
at her comming, they arose, and having received hir with greatreverence, they seated her in the midst, kindly cherishing the twochildren. after some gracious language past on eyther side, shedemanded of whence, and what they were, which they answered in thesame kind as they had done before to her husband. afterward, with amodest smiling countenance, she sayd. worthy gentlemen, let not myweake womanish discretion appeare distastable, in desiring to craveone especiall favour from you, namely, not to refuse or disdaine asmall gift, wherewith i purpose to present you. but considering first,that women (according to their simple faculty) are able to bestowbut silly gifts: so you would be pleased, to respect more the personthat is the giver, then the quality or quantity of the gift.
then causing to be brought (for each of them) two goodly gowns orrobes (made after the persian manner) the one lyned thorough withcloth of gold, and the other with the costlyest fur; not after suchfashion as citizens or marchants use to weare, but rather beseeminglords of greatest account, and three light under-wearing cassocks ormandillions, of carnatian sattin, richly imbroidred with gold andpearles, and lined thorow with white taffata, presenting these giftsto him, she sayd. i desire you gentlemen to receive these meanetrifies, such as you see my husband weares the like, and these otherbeside, considering you are so far from your wives, having travailed along way already, and many miles more yet to overtake; alsomarchants (being excellent men) affect to be comely and handsome intheir habits; although these are of slender value, yet (innecessity) they may do you service.
now was saladine and his baschaes halfe astonyed with admiration, atthe magnificent minde of signiour thorello, who would not forget theleast part of courtesie towardes them, and greatly doubted (seeing thebeauty and riches of the garments) least they were discovered bythorello. neverthelesse, one of them thus answered the lady. beleeveme madame, these are rich guiftes, not lightly either to be given,rich or receyved: but in regard of your strict imposition, we arenot able to deny them. this being done, with most gracious andcourteous demeanour, she departed from them, leaving her husband tokeepe them still companie; who furnished their servants also, withdivers worthy necessaries fitting for their journey.
afterward, thorello (by very much importunitie) wonne them to staywith him all the rest of the day; wherefore, when they had restedthemselves awhile, being attyred in their newly given robes; they rodeon horsebacke thorow the citty. when supper time came, they supt inmost honourable and worthy company, beeing afterwards lodged in mostfaire and sumptuous chambers, and being risen in the morning, inexchange of their horses (over-wearied with travaile) they found threeother very richly furnished, and their men also in like mannerprovided. which when saladine had perceyved, he tooke his baschaesaside, and spake in this manner.
by our greatest gods, i never met with any man, more compleat in allnoble perfections, more courteous and kinde then thorello is. if allthe christian kings, in the true and heroicall nature of kings, dodeale as honourably as i see this knight doeth, the soldane of babylonis not able to endure the comming of one of them, much lesse somany, as wee see preparing to make head against us. but beholding,that both refusall and acceptation, was all one in the minde ofthorello: after much kinde language had bin intercoursed betweenethem, saladine (with his attendants) mounted on horsebacke.
signiour thorello, with a number of his honourable friends (to thenumber of an hundred horsse) accompanied them a great distance fromthe citie, and although it greeved saladine exceedingly, to leavethe company of thorello, so dearely he was affected to him: butnecessity (which controlleth the power of all lawes whatsoever) mustneeds divide them: yet requesting his returne agayne that way, ifpossibly it might be granted; which saladine promised but did notperforme. well gentlemen (quoth thorello at parting) i know not whatyou are, neither (against your will) do i desire it: but whether yoube marchants or no remember me in your kindnesse, and so to theheavenly powers i commend you. saladine, having taken his leave of allthem that were with thorello, returned him this answer. sir, it mayone day hereafter so happen, as we shal let you see some of ourmarchandises, for the better confirmation of your beleefe, and ourprofession.
thus parted signior thorello and his friends, from saladine andhis company, who verily determined in the heighth of his minde, ifhe should be spared with life, and the warre (which he expected)concluded: to requite thorello with no lesse courtesie, then hee hadalready declared to him; conferring a long while after with hisbaschaes, both of him and his beauteous lady, not forgetting any oftheir courteous actions, but gracing them all with deservedcommendation. but after they had (with very laborious paines) surveyedmost of the westerne parts, they all tooke shipping, and returned intoalexandria: sufficiently informed, what preparation was to be made fortheir owne defence. and signior thorello being come backe againe topavia, consulted with his privat thoughts (many times after) whatthese three travailers should be, but came farre short of knowingthe truth, till (by experience) hee became better informed.
when the time was come, that the christians were to make theirpassage, and wonderfull great preparations, in all places performed:signiour thorello, notwithstanding the teares and intreaties of hiswife, determined to be one in so woorthy and honourable a voyage:and having made his provision ready, nothing wanting but mounting onhorsebacke, to go where he should take shipping; to his wife (whomhe most intirely affected) thus hee spake. madame, i goe as thou seestin this famous voyage, as well for mine honour, as also the benefiteof my soule; all our goodes and possessions, i commit to thyvertuous care. and because i am not certaine of my returning backeagaine, in regard of a thousand accidents which may happen, in sucha countrey as i goe unto: i desire onely but one favour of thee,whatsoever daunger shall befall mee; namely, when any certaine tydingsshall be brought you of my death; to stay no longer before thysecond marriage, but one yeare, one month, and one day; to begin onthis day of my departing from thee.
the lady, who wept exceedingly, thus answered. alas sir: i knownot how to carry my selfe, in such extremity of greefe, as now youleave me; but if my life surmount the fortitude of sorrow, andwhatsoever shall happen to you for certainty, either life or death:i will live and dye the wife of signiour thorello, and make myobsequies in his memory onely. so madame (replyed her husband) not so;be not overrash in promising any thing, albeit i am well assured, thatso much as consisteth in thy strength, i make no question of thyperformance. but consider withall (deare heart) thou art a yong woman,beautifull, of great parentage, and no way thereto inferior in theblessings of fortune.
thy vertues are many, and universally both divulged and knowen, inwhich respect, i make no doubt; but divers and sundrie great lords andgentlemen (if but the least rumor of my death be noysed) will makesulte for thee to thy parents and brethren, from whose violentsolicitings, wouldst thou never so resolutely make resistance, yetthou canst not be able to defend thy selfe; but whether thou wilt orno, thou must yeeld to please them; and this is the only reason, why iwould tie thee to this limited time, and not one day or minute longer.
adalietta, sweetly hugging him in her armes, and melting her selfein kisses, sighes, and teares on his face, said. well sir, i will doso much as i am able, in this your most kinde and loving imposition:and when i shall bee compelled to the contrary: yet rest thusconstantly assured, that i will not breake this your charge, so muchas in thought. praying ever heartily to the heavenly powers, that theywill direct your course home againe to me, before your prefixeddate, or else i shall live in continual languishing. in the knittingup of this woful parting, embracing and kissing either infinittimes, the lady tooke a ring from off her finger, and giving it to herhusband, said. if i chaunce to die before i see you againe, rememberme when you looke on this. he receiving the ring, and bidding allthe rest of his friends farewell, mounted on horsebacke, and rode awaywel attended.
being come unto geneway, he and his company boorded a galley, and(in few dayes after) arrived at acres, where they joyned themselveswith the christian army, wherein there happened a verie dangerousmortality: during which time of so sharpe visitation (the causeunknowne whence it proceeded) whether thorough the industrie, orrather the good fortune of saladine, well-neere all the rest of thechristians (which escaped death) were surprized his prisoner(without a blow strucken) and sundred and imprisoned in diverstownes and citties. amongest the which number of prisoners, it wassignior thorelloes chaunce to be one, and walked in bonds toalexandria, where being unknowne, and fearing least he should bediscovered: constrained thereto meerly by necessity, hee shewedhimselfe in the condition of a faulconer; wherein he was veryexcellently experienced, and by which means his profession was madeknowne to saladine, hee delivered out of prison, and created thesoldans faulconer.
thorello (whom the soldane called by no other name, then thechristian, neyther of them knowing the other) sadly now remembredhis departure from pavia, devising and practising many times, how hemight escape thence, but could not compasse it by any possible meanes.wherefore, certaine ambassadours beeing sent by the genewayes, toredeeme divers cittizens of theirs, there detained as prisoners, andbeing ready to returne home againe: he purposed to write to hiswife, that he was living, and wold repaire to her so soone as hecould, desiring the still continued rememberance of her limitedtime. by close and cunning meanes hee wrote the letter, earnestlyintreating one of the ambassadors (who knew him perfectly, but made nooutward apparance thereof) to deale in such sort for him, that theletter might be delivered to the handes of the abbot di san pietroin ciel d'oro, who was (indeede) his unckle.
while thorello remayned in this his faulconers condition, itfortuned uppon a day, that saladine, conversing with him about hishawkes: thorello chanced to smile, and used such a kinde of gesture ormotion with his lippes, which saladine (when he was in his house atpavia) had heedfully observed, and by this note, instantly heremembred signior thorello, and began to eye him very respectively,perswading himselfe that he was the same man. and therefore fallingfrom their former kinde of discoursing: tell me: christian (quothsaladine) what country-man art thou of the west? sir, answeredsigniour thorello, i am by country a lombard, borne in a cittycalled pavia, a poore man, and of as poore condition.
so soone as saladine had heard these words; becomming assured inthat which (but now) he doubted, he saide within himselfe. now thegods have given me time, wherein i may make knowne to this man, howthankefully i accepted his kinde courtesie, and cannot easily forgetit. then, without saying any thing else, causing his guard-robe tobe set open, he tooke him with him thither, and sayde. christian,observe well all these garments, and quicken thy remembrance, intelling mee truly, whether thou hast seene any of them before now,or no. signiour thorello looked on them all advisedly, and espyedthose two especiall garments, which his wife had given one of thestrange merchants; yet he durst not credit it, or that possibly itcould be the same, neverthelesse he said. sir, i doe not know any ofthem, but true it is, that these two doe resemble two such robes, as iwas wont to weare my selfe, and these (or the like) were given tothree merchants, that happened to visite my poore house.
now could saladine containe no longer, but embracing him joyfully inhis armes, he said. you are signior thorello d'istria, and i am one ofthose three merchants to whom your wife gave these roabes: and now thetime is come to give you credible intelligence of my merchandise, as ipromised at my departing from you, for such a time (i told you)would come at length. thorello, was both glad, and bashfulltogether: glad, that he had entertained such a guest, and bashfullyashamed, that his welcome had not exceeded in more bountifullmanner. thorello, replyed saladine, seeing the gods have sent you sohappily to me: account your selfe to be soly lord here, for i am nowno more then a private man.
i am not able to expresse their counterchanges of courtesie,saladine commanding him to be cloathed in royall garments, andbrought into the presence of his very greatest lords, where havingspoken liberally in his due commendation, he commanded them tohonour him as himselfe, if they expected any grace or favour from him,which every one did immediatly, but (above all the rest) those twobaschaes, which accompanied saladine at his house. the greatnesse ofthis pompe and glory, so suddenly throwne on signior thorello, madehim halfe forget all matters of lomberdie; and so much the rather,because he had no doubt at all, but that his letters, were safely cometo the hands of his uncle.
here i am to tell you, that in the campe or army of thechristians, on the day when saladine made his surprizal, there was aprovinciall gentleman dead and buried, who was signior thorello dedignes, a man of very honourable and great esteeme, in which respect(signior thorello d'istria, knowne throughout the army, by hisnobility and valour) whosoever heard that signior thorello was dead:beleeved it to be thorello d'istria, and not he of dignes, so thatthorello d'istriaes unknowne surprizall and thraldome, made it also topasse for an assured truth.
beside, many italians returning home, and carrying this report forcredible; some were so audaciously presumptuous, as they avouched upontheir oathes, that not onely they saw him dead, but were present athis buriall likewise. which rumour comming to the eare of his wife,and likewise to his kinred and hers: procured a great and grievousmourning among them, and all that happened to heare thereof.
over-tedious time it would require, to relate at large, the publiquegriefe and sorrow, with the continuall lamentations of his wife, who(within some few moneths after) became tormented with new marriagesolicitings, before she had halfe sighed for the first: the verygreatest persons of lomberdie making the motion, being dailyfollowed and furthered by her owne brothers and friends. still(drowned in teares) she returned denyall, till in the end, when nocontradiction could prevaile, to satisfie her parents, and theimportunate pursuers: she was constrained to reveale, the chargeimposed on her by her husband, which shee had vowed infallibly tokeepe, and till that very time, she would in no wise consent.
while wooing for a second wedding with adalietta, proceeded inthis manner at pavia, it chanced on a day, that signior thorello hadespied a man in alexandria whom he saw with the genewayambassadours, when they set thence towards geneway with their gallies.and causing him to be sent for, he demaunded of him, the successe ofthe voyage, and when the gallies arrived at geneway; whereto hereturned him this answere. my lord, our gallies made a very fatallvoyage, as it is (already) too well knowne in creete, where mydwelling is. for when we drew neere sicilie, there suddenly arose avery dangerous north-west-winde, which drove us on the quicke-sands ofbarbarie, where not any man escaped with life, onely my selfeexcepted, but (in the wracke) two of my brethren perished.
signior thorello, giving credit to the mans words, because they weremost true indeed, and remembring also, that the time limitted to hiswife, drew neere expiring within very few dayes, and no newes nowpossibly to be sent thither of his life, his wife wouldquestionlesse be marryed againe: he fell into such a deepe conceitedmelancholly, as food and sleepe forsooke him, whereupon, he kept hisbed, setting downe his peremptory resolution for death. whensaladine (who dearely loved him) heard thereof, he came in all hasteto see him, and having (by many earnest perswasions and entreaties)understood the cause of his melancholly and sickenesse: he veryseverely reproved him, because he could no sooner acquaint himtherewith. many kind and comfortable speeches, he gave him, withconstant assurance, that (if he were so minded) he would so orderthe businesse for him; as he should be at pavia, by the same time ashe had appointed to his wife, and revealed to him also the manner how.
thorello verily beleeved the soldanes promise, because he hadoften heard the possibility of performance, and others had effected asmuch, divers times else-where: whereupon he began to comfort himselfe,soliciting the soldan earnestly that it might be accomplished.saladine sent for one of his sorcerers (of whose skill he had formerlymade experience) to take a direct course, how signior thorelloshould be carryed (in one night) to pavia, and being in his bed. themagitian undertooke to doe it, but, for the gentlemans more ease, hemust first be possessed with an entraunced dead sleep. saladinebeing thus assured of the deeds full effecting, he came againe tothorello, and finding him to be setled for pavia (if possibly it mightbe accomplished by the determined time, or else no other expectationbut death) he said unto him as followeth.
signior thorello, if with true affection you love your wife, andmisdoubt her marriage to some other man: i protest unto you, by thesupreme powers, that you deserve no reprehension in any mannerwhatsoever. for, of all the ladyes that ever i have seene, she isthe onely woman, whose carriage, vertues, and civile speaking (settingaside beauty, which is but a fading flowre) deserveth mostgraciously to be respected, much more to be affected in the highestdegree. it were to me no meane favour of our gods, (seeing fortunedirected your course so happily hither) that for the short or longtime we have to live, we might reigne equally together in thesekingdomes under my subjection. but if such grace may not be grantedme, yet, seeing it stands mainly upon the perill of your life, to beat pavia againe by your own limitted time, it is my chiefestcomfort, that i am therewith acquainted, because i intended to haveyou conveighed thither, yea, even into your owne house, in suchhonourable order as your vertues doe justly merit, which in regardit cannot be so conveniently performed, but as i have already informedyou, and as the necessity of the case urgently commandeth; accept itas it may be best accomplished.
great saladine (answered thorella) effects (without words) havealready sufficiently warranted your gracious disposition towards me,farre beyond any requitall remayning in me; your word onely beingenough for my comfort in this case, either dying or living. but inregard you have taken such order for my departure hence, i desire tohave it done with all possible expedition, because to morrow is thevery last day, that i am to be absent. saladine protested that itshould be done, and the same evening in the great hall of his pallace,commanded a rich and costly bedde to be set up, the mattras formedafter the alexandrian manner, of velvet and cloth gold, the quilts,counterpoints and coverings, sumptuously imbroydered with orientpearles and precious stones, supposed to be of inestimable value,and two rarely wrought pillowes, such as best beseemed so stately abedde, the curtaines and vallans every way equall to the other pompe.
which being done, he commanded that thorello (who wasindifferently recovered) should be attyred in one of his ownesumptuous saracine roabes, the very fairest and richest that everwas seene, and on his head a majesticall turbant, after the mannerof his owne wearing, and the houre appearing to be somewhat late, hewith many of his best baschaes, went to the chamber where thorellowas, and sitting downe a while by him, in teares thus he spake.signior thorello, the houre for sundering you and me, is now veryneere, and because i cannot beare you company, in regard of thebusinesse you goe about, and which by no meanes will admit it: i am totake my leave of you in this chamber, and therefore am purposelycome to doe it. but before i bid you farewell, let me entreat you,by the love and friendship confirmed betweene us, to be mindfull ofme, and to take such order (your affaires being fully finished inlombardie) that i may once more enjoy the sight of you here, for amutuall solace and satisfaction of our mindes, which are now dividedby this urgent hast. till which may be granted, let me want novisitation of your kind letters, commanding thereby of me,whatsoever here can possibly be done for you: assuring your selfe,no man living can command me as you doe.
signior thorello could not forbeare weeping, but being muchhindred therby, answered in few words. that he could not possiblyforget, his gracious favours and extraordinary benefits used towardshim, but would accomplish whatsoever hee commaunded, according asheaven did enable him.
hereupon, saladine embracing him, and kissing his forehead, said.all my gods goe with you, and guard you from any perill, departingso out of the chamber weeping, and his baschaes (having likewise takentheir leave of thorello) followed saladine into the hall, whereasthe bedde stood readily prepared? because it waxed very late, andthe magitian also there attending for his dispatch: the phisitian wentwith the potion to thorello, and perswading him, in the way offriendship, that it was onely to strengthen him after his greatweaknes: he drank it off, being thereby immediately entraunced, and sopresently sleeping, was (by saladines command,) laid on thesumptuous and costly bed, whereon stood an imperiall crowne ofinfinite value, appearing (by a description engraven on it) thatsaladine sent it to madame adalietta, the wife of thorello. on hisfinger also hee put a ring, wherein was enchased an admirablecarbuncle, which seemed like a flaming torche, the value thereof notto bee estimated. by him likewise hee laid a rich sword, with thegirdle, hangers, and other furniture, such as seldome can be seene thelike. then hee laid a jewell on the pillow by him, so sumptuouslieembelished with pearles and precious stones, as might have beseemedthe greatest monarch in the world to weare. last of all, on eitherside of them, hee set two great basons of pure gold, full of doubleducates, many cords of orient pearles, rings, girdles, and othercostly jewells (over-tedious to bee recounted) and kissing him oncemore as hee lay in the bedde, commanded the magitian to dispatch andbe gone.
instantly, the bedde and thorello in it, in the presence ofsaladine, was invisibly carried thence, and while he sate conferringwith his baschaes, the bed, signior thorello, and all the rich jewellsabout him, was transported and set in the church of san pietro in cield'ore in pavia, according to his own request, and soundly sleeping,being placed directly before the high altar. afterward, when the bellsrung to mattines, the sexton entring the church with a light in hishand (where hee beheld a light of greater splendor) and suddenlyespied the sumptuous bedde there standing: not only was he smitteninto admiration, but hee ranne away also very fearefully. when theabbot and the monkes mette him thus running into the cloyster, theybecame amazed, and demanded the reason why he ranne in such haste,which the sexton told them. how? quoth the abbot, thou art nochilde, or a new-come hither, to be so easilie affrighted in ourholy church, where spirits can have no power to walke, god and saintpeter (wee hope) are stronger for us then so: wherefore turne backewith us, and let us see the cause of thy feare.
having lighted many torches, the abbot and his monkes entred withthe sexton into the church, where they beheld the wonderful richebedde, and the knight lying fast asleepe in it. while they stood allin amazement, not daring to approach neere the bedde, whereon lay suchcostly jewells: it chanced that signior thorello awaked, andbreathed forth a vehement sigh. the monkes and the abbot seeing him tostirre, ranne all away in feare, crying aloud, god and s. peter defendus.
by this time thorello had opened his eyes, and looking round abouthim, perceived that hee was in the place of saladines promise, whereofhee was not a little joyfull. wherefore, sitting up in the bedde,and particularly observing all the things about him: albeit he knewsufficiently the magnificence of saladine, yet now it appeared fargreater to him, and imagined more largely thereof, then hee coulddoe before. but yet, without any other ceremony, seeing the flightof the monkes, hearing their cry, and perceiving the reason; he calledthe abbot by his name, desiring him not to be afraid, for he was hisnephew thorello, and no other.
when the abbot heard this, hee was ten times worse affrighted thenbefore, because (by publique fame) hee had beene so many monethsdead and buried; but receiving (by true arguments) better assurance ofhim, and hearing him still call him by his name: blessing himselfewith the signe of the crosse, hee went somewhat neerer to the bed,when thorello said. my loving uncle, and religious holy father, wherofare you afraid? i am your loving nephew, newly returned from beyondthe seas. the abbot, seeing his beard to be grown long, and hishabit after the arabian fashion, did yet collect some resemblance ofhis former countenance; and being better perswaded of him, tooke himby the hand, saying:
sonne thou art happily returned, yet there is not any man in ourcitie, but doth verily beleeve thee to bee dead, and therefore doe notmuch wonder at our feare. moreover, i dare assure thee, that thywife adalietta, being conquered by the controuling command, andthreatnings of her kinred (but much against her owne minde) is thisvery morning to be married to a new husband, and the marriage feast issolemnly prepared, in honour of this second nuptialls.
thorello arising out of the bedde, gave gracious salutations tothe abbot and his monkes, intreating earnestly of them all, that noword might be spoken of his returne, untill he had compleated animportant businesse. afterward, having safely secured the bedde, andall the rich jewells, he fully acquainted the abbot with all hispassed fortunes, whereof he was immeasurably joyfull, and havingsatisfied him, concerning the new elected husband, thorello saidunto the abbot. unckle, before any rumour of my returne, i wouldgladly see my wives behavior at this new briding feast, and althoughmen of religion are seldome seene at such joviall meetings: yet (formy sake) doe you so order the matter, that i (as an arabianstranger) may be a guest under your protection; wherto the abbotvery gladly condescended.
in the morning, he sent to the bridegroom, and advertised him,that he (with a stranger newly arrived) intended to dine with him,which the gentleman accepted in thankefull manner. and when dinnertime came, thorello in his strange disguise went with the abbot to thebridegroomes house, where he was lookt on with admiration of all theguests, but not knowne or suspected by any one; because the abbotreported him to be a sarracine, and sent by the soldane (in ambassage)to the king of france. thorello was seated at a by-table, but directlyopposite to the new bride, whom hee much delighted to looke on, andeasily collected by her sad countenance, that shee was scarcely wellpleased with this new nuptialls. she likewise beheld him very often,not in regard of any knowlege she took of him: for the bushiness ofhis beard, strangeness of habit, (but most of all) firm beleefe of hisdeath, was the maine prevention.
at such time as thorello thought it convenient, to approve how farrehe was falne out of her remembrance; he took the ring which she gavehim at his departure, and calling a young page that waited on none butthe bride, said to him in italian: faire youth, goe to the bride,and saluting her from me, tell her, it is a custome observed in mycountry, that when any stranger (as i am heere) sitteth before a newmarried bride, as now shee is, in signe that hee is welcome to herfeast, she sendeth the same cup (wherein she drinketh her selfe)full of the best wine, and when the stranger hath drunke so much ashim pleaseth, the bride then pledgeth him with all the rest. thepage delivered the message to the bride, who, being a woman ofhonourable disposition, and reputing him to be a noble gentleman, totestifie that his presence there was very acceptable to her, sheecommanded a faire cuppe of gold (which stood directlie before her)to bee neately washed, and when it was filled with excellent wine,caused it to bee carried to the stranger, and so it was done.
thorello having drunke a heartie draught to the bride, conveyedthe ring into the cuppe, before any person could perceive it, andhaving left but small store of wine in it, covered the cuppe, and sentit againe to the bride, who received it very gracioasly, and to honourthe stranger in his countries custome, dranke up the rest of the wine,and espying the ring, shee tooke it forth undescried by any: knowingit to be the same ring which shee gave signior thorello at his partingfrom her; she fixed her eyes often on it, and as often on him, whomshe thought to be a stranger, the cheerfull bloud mounting up into hercheeks, and returning againe with remembrance to her heart, that(howsoever thus disguised) he only was her husband.
like one of bacchus froes, up furiously she started, and throwingdowne the table before her, cried out aloud: this is my lord andhusband, this truely is my lord thorello. so running to the tablewhere he sate, without regard of all the riches thereon, down shethrew it likewise, and clasping her armes about his necke, hung somainly on him (weeping, sobbing, and kissing him) as she could notbe taken off by any of the company, nor shewed any moderation inthis excesse of passion, till thorello spake, and entreated her tobe more patient, because this extremity was over-dangerous for her.thus was the solemnitic much troubled, but every one there very gladand joyfull for the recovery of such a famous and worthy knight, whointreated them all to vouchsafe him silence, and so related all hisfortunes to them, from the time of his departure, to the instanthoure. concluding withall, that hee was no way offended with the newbridegroome, who upon the so constant report of his death, deserved noblame in making election of his wife.
the bridegroome, albeit his countenance was somewhat cloudie, to seehis hope thus disappointed: yet granted freely, that adalietto wasthorello's wife in equitie, and bee could not justly lay any claime toher. she also resigned the crown and rings which she had so latelyreceived of her new spouse, and put that on her finger which she foundin the cup, and that crowne was set upon her head, in honor sent herfrom great saladine. in which triumphant manner, she left the newbridegrooms abiding, and repayred home to thorello's house, withsuch pompe and magnificence as never had the like been seene inpavia before, all the citizens esteeming it as a miracle, that theyhad so happily recovered signior thorello againe.
some part of the jewells he gave to him, who had beene at costwith marriage feasting, and some to his the abbot, beside a bountiebestowed on monkes. then he sent a messenger to saladine, with lettersof his whole successe, and confessing himselfe (for ever) hisobliged servant: living many yeeres (after) with his wife adalietta,and using greater curtesies to strangers, then ever before he haddone.
in this manner ended the troubles of signior thorello, and theafflictions of his dearely affected lady, with due recompence to theirhonest and ready courtesies. many strive (in outward shew) to doethe like, who although they are sufficiently able, doe performe itso basely, as i: rather redoundeth to their shame, then honour. andtherefore if no merit ensue thereon, but onely such disgrace as justlyshould follow; let them lay the blame upon themselves.
the tenth day, the tenth novell
set downe as an example or warning to all wealthie men,
how to have care of marrying themselves. and likewise to poore
and meane women, to be patient in their fortunes, and
obedient to their husbands
the marquesse of saluzzo, named gualtiero, being constrained bythe importunate solliciting of his lords, and other inferiourpeople, to joyne himselfe in marriage; tooke a woman according tohis owne liking, called grizelda, she being the daughter of a poorecountriman, named janiculo, by whom he had two children, which hepretended to be secretly murdered. afterward, they being grown toyeres of more stature, and making shew of taking in marriage anotherwife, more worthy of his high degree and calling: made a seemingpublique liking of his owne daughter, expulsing his wife grizeldapoorely from him. but finding her incomparable patience; moredearely (then before) hee received her into favour againe, brought herhome to his owne pallace, where (with her children) hee caused her andthem to be respectively honoured, in despight of all her adverseenemies.
questionlesse, the kings novell not so much exceed the rest inlength, but it proved as sing to the whole assembly, past with theirgenerall approbation, till dioneus (in a merry jesting humour) said.the plaine honest simple man, that stood holding the candle, to seethe setting on of his mules tayle; deserved two penny-worth of morepraise, then all our applauding of signior thorello: and knowinghimselfe to bee left for the last speaker, thus he began.
milde and modest ladies, for ought i can perceive to the contrary,this day was dedicated to none but kings, soldanes, and greatpotentates, not in favour of any inferiour or meaner persons. andtherefore, because i would be loth to dis-ranke my selfe from therest, i purpose to speake of a lord marquesse, not any matter of greatmagnificence, but rather in a more humble nature, and sorted to anhonest end: which yet i will not advise any to immitate, because(perhaps) they cannot so well digest it, as they did whom my novellconcerneth; thus then i begin.
it it a great while since, when among those that were lordmarquesses of saluzzo, the very greatest and worthiest man of them al,was a young noble lord, named gualtiero, who having neyther wife norchilde, spent his time in nothing else but hawking and hunting: norhad he any minde of marriage, or to enjoy the benefit of children,wherein many did repute him the wiser. but this being distastfull tohis subjects, they very often earnestly solicited him, to matchhimselfe with a wife, to the end, that hee might not decease withoutan heire, nor they be left destitute of a succeeding lord; offeringthemselves to provide him of such a one, so well descended by fatherand mother, as not only should confirm their hope, but also yeeldhim high contentment; whereto the lord marquess thus answered.
worthie friends, you would constraine me to the thing, wherewith inever had any intent to meddle, considering, how difficult a case itis to meet with such a woman, who can agree with a man in all hisconditions, and how great the number is of them, who daily happen onthe contrarie: but most (and worst of all the rest) how wretched andmiserable prooves the life of man, who is bound to live with a wifenot fit for him. and in saying, you can learn to understand thecustome and qualities of children, by behaviour of the fathers andmothers, and so to provide mee of a wife, it is a meere argument offolly: for neither shall i comprehend, or you either, the secretinclinations of parents; i meane of the father, and much lesse thecomplexion of the mother. but admitte it were within compasse of powerto know them; yet it is a frequent sight, and observed every day; thatdaughters doe resemble neither father nor mother, but that they arenaturally governed by their owne instinct.
but because you are so desirous to have me fettered in the chains ofwedlocke; i am contented to grant what you request. and because iwould have no complaint made of any but my selfe, if matters shouldnot happen answerable to expectation; i will make mine owne eyes myelectors, and not see by any others sight. giving you this assurancebefore, that if she whom i shall make choice of, be not of youhonoured and respected as your lady and mistresse: it will ensue toyour detriment, how much you have displeased me, to take a wife atyour request, and against mine owne will.
the noble men answered, that they were well satisfied, provided thathe tooke a wife.
some indifferent space of time before, the beauty, manners, andwell-seeming vertues, of a poore countrie-mans daughter, dwelling inno farre distant village, had appeared very pleasing to the lordmarquesse, and gave him full perswasion, that with her hee should leada comfortable life. and therefore without any further search orinquisition, he absolutely resolved to marry her, and having conferredwith her father, agreed, that his daughter should be his wife.whereupon, the marquesse made a generall convocation of all his lords,barons, and other of his especiall friends, from all parts of hisdominion; and when they were assembled together, hee then spake untothem in manner as followeth.honourable friends, it appeared pleasing to you all, and yet (ithinke) you are of the same minde, that i should dispose my selfe totake a wife: and i thereto condescended, more to yeeld youcontentment, then for any particular desire in my selfe. let mee nowremember you of your solemne made promise, with full consent tohonor and obey her (whosoever) as your soveraigne lady andmistresse, that i shall elect to make my wife: and now the time iscome, for my exacting the performance of that promise, and which ilook you must constantly keepe. i have made choyce of a yongvirgine, answerable to mine owne heart and liking, dwelling notfarre off hence, whom i intend to make my wife, and (within few dales)to have her brought home to my pallace. let your care and diligencethen extend so farre, as to see that the feast may be sumptuous, andher entertainment to bee most honourable: to the end that i mayreceive as much contentment in your promise performed, as you shallperceive i doe in my choice.
the lords and all the rest, were wondrously joyfull to heare himso well inclined, expressing no lesse by their shouts and jocundsuffrages: protesting cordially, that she should be welcommed withpompe and majestie, and honoured of them all, as their liege ladie andsoveraigne. afterward, they made preparation for a princely andmagnificent feast, as the marquesse did the like, for a marriage ofextraordinary state and qualitie, inviting all his kinred, friends,and acquaintance in all parts and provinces, about him. hee madealso readie most riche and costly garments, shaped by the body of acomely young gentlewoman, who he knew to be equall in proportion andstature, to her of whom hee hade made his election.
when the appointed nuptiall day was come, the lord marques, aboutnine of the clocke in the morning, mounted on horsebacke, as all therest did, who came to attend him honourably, and having all thingsin due readinesse with them, he said: lords, it is time for us togoe fetch the bride. so on hee rode with his traine, to the same poorevillage whereat shee dwelt, and when hee was come to her fathershouse, hee saw the maiden returning very hastily from a well, whereshee had beene to fetch a paile of water, which shee set downe, andstood (accompanied with other maidens) to see the passage by of thelord marquesse and his traine. gualtiero called her by her name, whichwas grizelda, and asked her, where her father was: who bashfullyanswered him, and with an humble courtesie, saying. my graciouslord, hee is in the house.
then the marquesse dismounted from his horse, commanding every oneto attend him, then all alone hee entred into the poore cottage, wherehe found the maides father, being named janiculo, and said unto him.god speed good father, i am come to espouse thy daughter grizelda: butfirst i have a few demands to make, which i will utter to her in thypresence. then hee turned to the maide, and saide.
faire grizelda, if i make you my wife, will you doe your bestendeavour to please me, in all things which i shall doe or say? willyou also be gentle, humble, and patient? with divers other the likequestions: whereto she still answered, that she would, so neere asheaven (with grace) should enable her.
presently he tooke her by the hand, so led her forth of the poorehomely house, and in the presence of all his company, with his ownehands, he took off her meane wearing garments, smocke and all, andcloathed her with those robes of state which he had purposelybrought thither for her, and plaiting her haire over her shoulders,hee placed a crowne of gold on her head, whereat every one standing asamazed, and wondring not a little, hee said: grizelda, wilt thouhave me to thy husband? modestly blushing, and kneeling on the ground,she answered. yes my gracious lord, if you will accept so poore amaiden to be your wife. yes grizelda, quoth hee, with this holy kisse,i confirme thee for my wife; and so espoused her before them all. thenmounting her on a milke-white palfray, brought thither for her, sheewas thus honourably conducted to her pallace.
now concerning the marriage feast and triumphes, they were performedwith no lesse pompe, then if she had beene daughter to the king offrance. and the young bride apparantly declared, that (with hergarments) her minde and behavior were quite changed. for indeed sheewas (as it were shame to speake otherwise) a rare creature, both ofperson and perfections, and not onely was shee absolute for beautie,but so sweetely amiand gracious, and goodlie; as if she were not thedaughter of poore janicula, and a countrie shepheardesse, but ratherof some noble lord, whereat every one wondred that had knowne her.beside all this, shee was so obedient to her husband, so fervent inall dutifull offices, and patient, without the very least provoking:as hee held himselfe much more then contented, and the onely happy manof the world.
in like manner, towards the subjects of her lord and husband, sheshewed her selfe alwayes so benigne and gracious; as there was not anyone, but the more they lookt on her, the better they loved her,honouring her voluntarily, and praying to the heavens, for her health,dignity and well-fares long continuance. speaking now (quitecontrary to their former opinion of the marquesse) honourably andthily, that he had shewne him selfe a singular wise man, in theelection of his wife, which few else (but he) in the world wouldhave done: because their judgement might fall farre short, ofdiscerning those great and precious vertues, veiled under a homelyhabite, and obscured in a poore countrey cottage. to be briefe, invery short time, not onely the marquisate it selfe, but allneighbouring provinces round about, had no other common talke, butof her rare course of life, devotion, charity, and all good actionselse; quite quailing all sinister instructions of her husband,before he received her in marriage.
about foure or five yeeres after the birth of her daughter, sheeconceived with child againe, and (at the limitted houre ofdeliverance) had a goodly sonne, to the no little liking of themarquesse. afterward, a strange humour entred into his braine, namely,that by a long continued experience, and courses of intollerablequality; he would needes make proofe of his faire wives patience.first he began to provoke her by injurious speeches, shewing fierceand frowning lookes to her, intimating; that his people grewdispleased with him, in regard of his wives base birth andeducation, and so much the rather, because she was likely to bringchildren, who (by her blood) were no better then beggers, and murmuredat the daughter already borne. which words when grizelda heard,without any alteration of countenance, for the least distemperature inany appearing action she said.
my honourable and gracious lord, dispose of me, as you thinkebest, for your owne dignity and contentment, for i shall therewithbe well pleased: as she that knowes her selfe, farre inferiour tothe meanest of your people, much lesse worthy of the honour, wheretoyou liked to advance me.
this answere was very welcome to the marquesse, as apparantlyperceiving hereby, that the dignity whereto hee had exalted her, orany particular favours beside, could not infect her with any pride,coynesse, or disdaine. not long after, having told her in plaine andopen speeches, that his subjects could not endure her so late bornedaughter: he called a trusty servant of his, and having instructed himwhat he should doe, sent him to grizelda, and he being alone with her,looking very sadde, and much perplexed in mind, he saide. madame,except i intend to loose mine owne life, i must accomplish what mylord hath strictly enjoyned me, which is, to take this your yongdaughter, and then i must: so breaking off abruptly, the ladyhearing his words, and noting his frowning lookes, remembring alsowhat the marquesse himselfe had formerly said; she presently imagined,that he had commanded his servant to kill the childe. suddenlytherefore, she tooke it out of the cradle, and having sweetlykissed, and bestowne her blessing on it (albeit her heart throbbed,with the inward affection of a mother) without any alteration ofcountenance, she tenderly laid it in the servants armes, and said.here friend, take it, and doe with it as thy lord and mine hathcommanded thee: but leave it in no rude place, where birds or savagebeasts may devour it, except it be his will to have it so.
the servant departing from her with the child, and reporting themarquesse what his lady had said; he wondered at her incomparableconstancy. then he sent it by the same servant to bologna, to anhonourable lady his kinsewoman, requesting her (without revealingwhose child it was) to see it both nobly and carefully educated.
at time convenient afterward, being with child againe, and deliveredof a princely sonne (then which nothing could be more joyfull to themarquesse) yet all this was not sufficient for him; but with farreruder language then before, and lookes expressing harsh intentions, hesaid unto her. grizelda, though thou pleasest me wonderfully, by thebirth of this princely boy, yet my subjects are not therewithcontented, but blunder abroad maliciously; that the grandchild ofjaniculo, a poore countrey pezant, when i am dead and gone, must betheir soveraigne lord and master. which makes me stand in feare oftheir expulsion, and to prevent that, i must be rid of this childe, aswell as the other, and then send thee away from hence, that i may takeanother wife, more pleasing to them.
grizelda, with a patient sufferent soule, hearing what he hadsaid, returned no other answere but this. most gracious and honourablelord, satisfie and please your owne royall minde, and never use anyrespect of me: for nothing is precious or pleasing to mee, but whatmay agree with your good liking. within a while after, the noblemarquesse in the like manner as he did before for the daughter, sohe sent the same servant for the sonne, and seeming as if he hadsent it to have been slaine, conveighed it to be nursed at bologna, incompany of his sweete sister. whereat the lady shewed no otherdiscontentment in any kinde, then formerly she had done for herdaughter, to the no meane marvell of the marquesse, who protested inhis soule, that the like woman was not in all the world beside. andwere it not for his heedfull observation, how loving and carefullshe was of her children, prizing them as dearely as her owne life:rash opinion might have perswaded him, that she had no more in her,then a carnall affection, not caring how many she had, so shee mightthus easily be rid of them; but he knew her to be a truely vertuousmother, and wisely liable to endure his severest impositions.
his subjects beleeving, that he had caused the children to beeslaine, blamed him greatly, thought him to be a most cruell man, anddid highly compassionate the ladies case: who when shee came incompany of other gentlewomen, which mourned for their deceassedchildren, would answere nothing else: but that they could not bemore pleasing to her, then they were to the father that begot them.
within certaine yeares after the birth of these children, themarquesse purposed with himselfe, to make his last and finall proofeof faire grizeldaes patience, and said to some neere about him: thathe could no longer endure, to keepe grizelda as his wife,confessing, he had done foolishly, and according to a young giddiebraine, when he was so rash in the marriage of her. wherfore hewould send to the pope, and purchase a dispensation from him, torepudiate grizelda, and take another wife. wherein although theygreatly reproved him; yet he told them plainely, that it must needesbe so.
the lady hearing these newes, and thinking she must returne againeto her poore father's house, and (perhaps) to her old occupation ofkeeping sheepe, as in her yonger dayes she had done, understandingwithall, that another woman must enjoy him, whom shee dearely lovedand honoured; you may well thinke (worthy ladies) that her patiencewas now put to the maine proofe indeede. neverthelesse, as with aninvincible true vertuous courage, she had outstood all the otherinjuries of fortune; so did she constantly settle her soule, tobeare this with an undaunted countenance and behaviour.
at such time as was prefixed for the purpose, counterfeit letterscame to the marquesse (as sent from rome) which he caused to bepublikely read in the hearing of his subjects: that the pope haddispensed with him, to leave grizelda, and marry with another wife,wherefore sending for her immediatly, in presence of them all, thus hespake to her. woman, by concession sent me from the pope, he hathdispensed with me, to make choyce of another wife, and to free myselfe from thee. and because my predecessors have beene noblemen,and great lords in this country, thou being the daughter of a poorecountrey clowne, and their blood and mine notoriously imbased, by mymarriage with thee: i intend to have thee no longer my wife, butwill returne thee home to thy fathers house, with all the rich dowrythou broughtest me; and then i wil take another wife, with whom i amalready contracted, better beseeming my birth, and farre morecontenting and pleasing to my people.
the lady hearing these words (not without much paine and difficulty)restrayned her teares, quite contrary to the naturall inclination ofwomen, and thus answered. great marquesse, i never was so empty ofdiscretion, but did alwayes acknowledge, that my base and humblecondition, could not in any manner sute with your high blood andnobility, and my being with you, i ever acknowledged, to proceedfrom heaven and you, not any merit of mine, but onely as a favour lentme, which you being now pleased to recall backe againe, i ought tobe pleased (and so am) that it bee restored. here is the ring,wherewith you espoused me; here (in all humility) i deliver it to you.you command me, to carry home the marriage dowry which i broughtwith me: there is no need of a treasurer to repay it me, neither anynew purse to carry it in, much lesse any sumpter to be laden withit. for (noble lord) it was never out of my memory, that you tookeme starke naked, and if it shall seeme sightly to you, that thisbody which hath borne two children, and begotten by you, must againebe seene naked; willingly must i depart hence naked. but i humblybeg of your excellency, in recompence of my virginity, which i broughtyou blamelesse, so much as in thought: that i may have but one of mywedding smocks, onely to conceale the shame of nakednesse, and theni depart rich enough.
the marquesse whose heart wept bloody teares, as his eyes wouldlikewise gladly have yeelded their naturall tribute; covered allwith a dissembled angry countenance, and starting up, said. goe,give her a smocke onely, and so send her gadding. all there presentabout him, entreated him to let her have a petticote, because it mightnot be said, that she who had been his wife thirteene yeares and more,was sent away so poorely in her smocke: but all their perswasionsprevailed not with him. naked in her smocke, without hose or shoes,bareheaded, and not so much as a cloth about her necke, to the greatgriefe and mourning of all that saw her, she went home to her oldfathers house.
and he (good man) never beleeving, that the marquesse would longkeepe his daughter as his wife, but rather expected dally, what nowhad happened: safely laid up the garments, whereof the marquessedespoyled her, the same morning when he espoused her. wherefore hedelivered them to her, and she fell to her fathers houshold businesse,according as formerly she had done; sustayning with a great andunconquerable spirit, all the cruell assaults of her enemy fortune.
about such time after, as suted with his owne disposition, themarquesse made publiquely knowne to his subjects, that he meant tojoyne in marriage again, with the daughter to one of the counts ofpanago, and causing preparation to be made for a sumptuous wedding; hesent for grizelda, and she being come, thus he spake to her. thewife that i have made the new election of, is to arrive here withinvery few dayes, and at her first comming, i would have her to bemost honourably entertained. thou knowest i have no women in my house,that can decke up the chambers, and set all requisite things in dueorder, befitting for so solemne a feast: and therefore i sent forthee, who knowing (better then any other) all the partes, provisionand goods in the house, set every thing in such order, as thou shaltthinke necessary.
invite such ladies and gentlewomen as thou wilt, and give themwelcome, even as if thou wert the lady of the house: and when themarriage is ended, returne then home to thy father againe.
although these words pierced like wonding daggers, the heart ofpoore (but noble patient) grizelda, as being unable to forget theunequal'd love she bare to the marquesse, though the dignitie of herformer fortune, more easily slipt out of her remembrance; yetneverthelesse, thus she answered.
my gracious lord, i am glad i can doe you any service; wherein youshall find mee both willing and ready. in the same poore garments,as she came from her fathers house, (although shee was turned out inher smocke) she began to sweep and make cleane the chambers, rubbe thestooles and benches in the hall, and ordered every in the kitchin,as if she were the worst maide in all the house, never ceasing orgiving over, till all things were in due and decent order as bestbeseemed in such a case. after all which was done, the marquesse,having invited all the ladies of the countrey, to be present at sogreat a feast: when the marriage day came, grizelda, in her gowne ofcountrey gray, gave them welcome, in honourable manner, and gracedthem all with very cheerefull countenance.
gualtiero the marquesse, who had caused his two children to be noblynourished at bologna, with a neere kinswoman of his, who had marriedwith one of the counts of panago, his daughter being now aged twelveyeares old, and somewhat more, as also the son about sixe or seven. hesent a gentleman expresly to his kindred, to have them come and visitehim at saluzza, bringing his daughter and sonne with them, attended invery honourable manner, and publishing every where as they came along,that the young virgin (knowne to none but himselfe and them) should bethe wife to the marquesse, and that onely was the cause of hercomming. the gentleman was not slacke, in the execution of the trustreposed in him: but having made convenient preparation; with thekindred, sonne, daughter, and a worthy company attending on them,arrived at saluzza about dinner time, where wanted no resort, from allneighbouring parts round about, to see the comming of the lordmarquesses new spouse.
by the lords and ladies she was joyfully entertained, and comminginto the great hall, where the tables were readily covered:grizelda, in her homely country habite, humbled her selfe beforeher, saying. gracious welcome, to the new elected spouse of the lordmarquesse.
all the ladies there present, who had very earnestly importunedgualtiero (but in vaine) that grizelda, might better be shut up insome chamber, or else to lend her the wearing of any other garments,which formerly had been her owne, because she should not be so poorelyseene among strangers: being seated at the tables, she waited onthem very serviceably. the yong virgin was observed by every one,who spared not to say; that the marquesse had made an excellentchange: but above them all, grizelda did most commend her, and sodid her brother likewise, as young as he was, yet not knowing her tobe his sister.
now was the marquesse sufficiently satisfied in his soule, that hehad seene so much as he desired, concerning the patience of hiswife, who in so many hart-grieving trials, was never noated so much asto alter her countenance. and being absolutely perswaded, that thisproceeded not from any want of understanding in her, because he knewher to be singularly wise: he thought it high time now, to free herfrom these afflicting oppressions, and give her such assurance asshe ought to have. wherefore, commanding her into his presence, openlybefore all his assembled friends, smiling on her, he said. whatthinkst thou grizelda of our new chosen spouse? my lord (quoth she)i like her exceeding well, and if she be so wise, as she is faire(which verely i thinke she is) i make no doubt but you shall live withher, as the onely happy man of the world. but i humbly entreat yourhonor (if i have any power in me to prevaile by) that you would notgive her such cutting and unkind language, as you did to your otherwife: for i cannot thinke her armed with such patience, as should(indeed) support them: as wel in regard she is much yonger, as alsoher more delicate breeding and education, whereas she who you hadbefore, was brought up in continual toile and travaile.
when the marquesse perceyved, that grizelda beleeved verily, thisyong daughter of hers should be his wife, and answered him in sohonest and modest manner: he commanded her to sit downe by him, andsaide. grizelda, it is now more then fitte time, that thou shouldsttaste the fruite of thy long admired patience, and that they whohave thought me cruell, harsh and uncivill natured, should at lengthobserve, that i have done nothing basely, or unadvisedly. for this wasa worke premeditated before, for enstructing thee, what it is to bea married wife, and to let them know (whosoever they be) how to takeand keepe a wife. which hath begotten (to me) perpetuall joy andhappinesse, so long as i have a day to live with thee: a matterwhereof i stoode before greatly in feare, and which (in marriage ithought) would never happen to me.
it is not unknown to thee, in how many kinds (for my first proofe) igave thee harsh and unpleasing speeches, which drawing nodiscontentment from thee, either in lookes, words, or behaviour, butrather such comfort as my soule desired, and so in my othersucceedings afterward: in one minute now, i purpose to give theethat consolation, which i bereft thee of in many tempestuousstormes, and make a sweet restauration, for all thy former sowersufferinges. my faire and dearly affected grizelda, shee whom thousupposest for my new elected spouse, with a glad and cheerfull hart,imbrace for thine owne daughter, and this also her brother, beeingboth of them thy children and mine, in common opinion of the vulgarmultitude, imagined to be (by my command) long since slaine. i amthy honourable lord and husband, who doth, and will love thee farreabove all women else in the world; giving thee justly this deservedpraise and commendation, that no man living hath the like wife, as ihave.
so, sweetly kissing her infinitely, and hugging her joyfully inhis armes (the teares now streaming like new-let-loose rivers, downeher faire face, which no disaster before could force from her) heebrought her, and seated her by her daughter, who was not a littleamazed at so rare an alteration. shee having in zeale of affection)kissed and embraced them both, all else there present being clearelyresolved from the former doubt which too long deluded them; the ladiesarose jocondly from the tables, and attending on grizelda to herchamber, in signe of a more successfull augury to follow, tooke offher poor contemptible rags, and put on such costly robes, which (aslady marchionesse) she used to weare before.
afterward, they waited on her into the hall againe, being their truesoveraigne lady and mistresse, as she was no lesse in her poorestgarments; where all rejoycing for the new restored mother, and happyrecovery of so noble a son and daughter, the festivall continuedmany months after. now every one thought the marquesse to be a nobleand wise prince, though somewhat sharpe and unsufferable, in thesevere experiences made of his wife: but (above al) they reputedgrizelda, to be a most wise, patient, and vertuous lady. the countof panago, within few daies after returned backe to bologna; and thelord marques, fetching home old janiculo from his country drudgery, tolive with him (as his father in law) in his princely palace, gavehim honorable maintenance, wherein hee long continued, and ended hisdaies. afterward, he matched his daughter in a noble marriage: heand grizelda living a long time together, in the highest honor thatpossibly could be.
what can now be saide to the contrary, but that poore countrycottages, may yeeld as divine and excellent spirits, as the moststately and royall mansions, which breed and bring uppe some, moreworthy to be hog-rubbers, then hold any soveraignty over men? where isany other (beside grizelda) who not only without a wet eye, butimboldned by a valiant and invincible courage: that can suffer thesharpe rigors, and (never the like heard of proofes) made by themarquesse? perhaps he might have met with another, who would havequitted him in a contrary kinde, and for thrusting her forth of dooresin her smocke, could have found better succor somewhere else, ratherthen walke so nakedly in the cold streets.
dioneus having thus ended his novel, and the ladies delivering theirseverall judgements, according to their owne fancies, some holding oneconceite, others leaning to the contrary; one blaming this thing,and another commending that, the king lifting his eyes to heaven,and seeing the sun began to fal low, by rising of the eveningstarre; without arising from his seat, spake as followeth. discreetladies, i am perswaded you know sufficiently, that the sense andunderstanding of us mortals, consisteth not onely (as i think) bypreserving in memory things past, or knowledge of them present; butsuch as both by the one and other, know how to foresee futureoccasions, are worthily thought wise, and of no common capacity.
it will be (to morrow) fifteene dayes, since we departed from thecity of florence, to come hither for our pastime and comfort, theconservation of our lives, and support of our health, by avoydingthose melanchollies, griefes and anguishes, which we beheld dayliein our city, since the pestilentiall visitation beganne there, wherein(by my judgement) we have done well and honestly. albeit some lightnovels, perhaps attractive to a little wantonnes, as some say, and ourjoviall feasting with good cheare, singing and dancing, may seemematters inciting to incivility, especially in weake and shallowunderstandings. but i have neither seene, heard, or knowne, anyacte, word, or whatsoever else, either on your part or ours, justlydeserving to be blamed: but all has bin honest, as in a sweete andhermonious concord, such as might well beseeme the communitie ofbrethren and sisters; which assuredly, as well in regard of you, asus, hath much contented me.
and therefore, least by over-long consuetude, something shouldtake life, which might be converted to a bad construction, and byour country demourance for so many dayes, some captious conceit maywrest out an ill imagination; i am of the minde (if yours be the like)seeing each of us hath had the honor, which now remaineth still on me:that it is very fitting for us, to returne thither from whence wecame. and so much the rather, because this sociable meeting of ours,which already hath wonne the knowledge of many dwellers here about us,should not grow to such an increase, as might make our purposedpastime offensive to us. in which respect (if you allow of advise) iwil keepe the crowne till our departing hence; the which i intendshalbe to morrow: but if you determine otherwise i am the man readyto make my resignation.
many imaginations passed amongst the ladies, and likewise the men,but yet in the end, they reputed the kings counsell to bee the bestand wisest, concluding to do as he thought convenient. wherupon, heecalled the master of the housholde, and conferred with him, of thebusinesse belonging to the next morning, and then gave the companyleave to rise. the ladies and the rest, when they were risen, fel someto one kinde of recreation, and others as their fancies served them,even as (before) they had done. and when supper time came, theydispatcht it in very loving manner. then they began to play oninstruments, sing and dance, and madame lauretta leading the dance:the king commaunded madame fiammetta to sing a song, whichpleasantly she began in this manner.
the song
the chorus sung by all the rest of the company
if love were free from jealousie,
no lady living,
had lesse heart-greeving,
or liv'd so happily as i.
if gallant youth
in a faire friend, a woman could content,
if vertues prize, valour and hardiment,
wit, carriage, purest eloquence,
could free a woman from impatience:
then i am she can vaunt (if i were wise)
all these in one faire flower,
are in my power,
and yet i boast no more but trueth.
if love were free from jealousie, etc.
but i behold
that other women are as wise as
which killes me quite,
fearing false sirquedrie.
for when my fire begins to flame
others desires misguide my aim,
and so bereaves me of secure delight.
onely through fond mistrust, he is unjust:
thus are my comforts hourely hot and cold.
if love were free, etc.
if in my friend,
i found like faith, as manly minde i know;
mistrust were slaine.
but my fresh griefes still grow,
by sight of such as do allure,
so i can thinke none true, none sure,
but all would rob me of my golden gaine.
loe thus i dye, in jealousie,
for losse of him, on whom i most depend.
if love were free, etc.
let me advise
such ladies as in love are bravely bold,
not to wrong me, i scorne to be controld.
if any one i chance to finde,
by winkes, words, smiles, in crafty kinde,
seeking for that, which onely mine should be:
then i protest, to do my best,
and make them know, that they are scarsly wise.
if love were free from jealousie,
i know no lady living,
could have lesse heart-greeving,
or live so happily as i.
so soone as madam flammetta had ended her song; dioneus, who sate byher, smiling said. truly madam, you may do us a great courtesie, toexpresse your selfe more plainly to us all, least (thorow ignorance)the possession may be imposed on your selfe, and so you remaine themore offended.
after the song was past, divers other were sung beside, and it nowdrawing wel-neere midnight, by the kings command, they all went tobed. and when new day appeared, and all the world awaked out ofsleepe, the master of the houshold having sent away the carriages;they returned (under the conduct of their discreet king) toflorence, where the three gentlemen left the seven ladies at thechurch of santa maria novella, from whence they went with them atthe first. and having parted with kinde salutations, the gentlemenwent whether themselves best pleased, and the ladies repaired hometo their houses.
-the end-